ALSO BY TIMOTHY SNYDER
Nationalism, Marxism, and Modern Central Europe: A Biography of
Kazimierz Kelles-Krauz
Wall Around the West: State Borders and Immigration Controls in the
United States and Europe (ed. with Peter Andreas)
The Reconstruction of Nations: Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania, Belarus,
1569–1999
Sketches from a Secret War: A Polish Artist’s Mission to Liberate Soviet
Ukraine
The Red Prince: The Secret Lives of a Habsburg Archduke
Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin
Thinking the Twentieth Century (with Tony Judt)
Stalin and Europe: Imitation and Domination, 1928–1953 (ed. with Ray
Brandon)
Ukrainian History, Russian Policy, and European Futures (in Russian
and Ukrainian)
The Politics of Life and Death (in Czech)
The Balkans As Europe: The Nineteenth Century (ed. with Katherine
Younger, forthcoming)

Copyright © 2015 by Timothy Snyder
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Tim Duggan Books, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group,
a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
Tim Duggan Books and the Crown colophon are trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is on file with the Library of Congress.
ISBN 9781101903452
eBook ISBN 9781101903469
Maps by Beehive Mapping
Cover design by Darren Haggar
Cover art © Image Source/Corbis
v4.1
a

For K. and T.

Im Kampf zwischen Dir und der Welt,
sekundiere der Welt.
In the struggle between you and the world
take the side of the world.
—FRANZ KAFKA, 1917

Ten jest z ojczyzny mojej.
Jest człowiekiem.
He is from my homeland.
A human being.
—ANTONI SLONIMSKI, 1943

Schwarze Milch der Frühe wir trinken sie abends
wir trinken sie mittags und morgens wir trinken sie nachts
wir trinken und trinken
The black milk of daybreak
we drink in the evening
in the afternoon in the morning in the night
we drink and we drink
—PAUL CELAN, 1944

Every man has a name
given by the stars
given by his neighbors.
—ZELDA MISHKOVSKY, 1974

Contents

Cover
Also by Timothy Snyder
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Epigraph
Prologue

INTRODUCTION: HITLER’S WORLD
1. LIVING SPACE
2. BERLIN, WARSAW, MOSCOW
3. THE PROMISE OF PALESTINE
4. THE STATE DESTROYERS
5. DOUBLE OCCUPATION
6. THE GREATER EVIL
7. GERMANS, POLES, SOVIETS, JEWS
8. THE AUSCHWITZ PARADOX
9. SOVEREIGNTY AND SURVIVAL
10. THE GREY SAVIORS
11. PARTISANS OF GOD AND MAN
12. THE RIGHTEOUS FEW
CONCLUSION: OUR WORLD
Acknowledgments
Notes
A Note on Usages
Archives and Abbreviations
Published Sources

Prologue

In the fashionable sixth district of Vienna, the history of the Holocaust is
in the pavement. In front of the buildings where Jews once lived and
worked, ensconced in sidewalks that Jews once had to scrub with their
bare hands, are small square memorials in brass bearing names, dates of
deportation, and places of death.
In the mind of an adult, words and numbers connect present and past.
A child’s view is different. A child starts from the things.
A little boy who lives in the sixth district observes, day by day, as a crew
of workers proceeds, building by building, up the opposite side of his
street. He watches them dig up the sidewalk, just as they might in order
to repair a pipe or lay some cable. Waiting for his bus to kindergarten one
morning, he sees the men, directly across the street now, shovel and pack
the steaming black asphalt. The memorial plaques are mysterious objects
in gloved hands, reflecting a bit of pale sun.
“Was machen sie da, Papa?” “What are they doing, Daddy?” The boy’s
father is silent. He looks up the street for the bus. He hesitates, starts to
answer: “Sie bauen…” “They are building…” He stops. This is not easy.
Then the bus comes, blocking their view, opening with a wheeze of oil and
air an automatic door to a normal day.
—
Seventy-five years earlier, in March 1938, on streets throughout Vienna,
Jews were cleansing the word “Austria” from the pavement, unwriting a
country that was ceasing to exist as Hitler and his armies arrived. Today,
on those same pavements, the names of those very Jews reproach a
restored Austria that, like Europe itself, remains unsure of its past.
Why were the Jews of Vienna persecuted just as Austria was removed
from the map? Why were they then sent to be murdered in Belarus, a

thousand kilometers away, when there was evident hatred of Jews in
Austria itself? How could a people established in a city (a country, a
continent) suddenly have its history come to a violent end? Why do
strangers kill strangers? And why do neighbors kill neighbors?
In Vienna, as in the great cities of central and western Europe
generally, Jews were a prominent part of urban life. In the lands to the
north, south, and east of Vienna, in eastern Europe, Jews had lived
continuously in towns and villages in large numbers for more than five
centuries. And then, in less than five years, more than five million of
them were murdered.
—
Our intuitions fail us. We rightly associate the Holocaust with Nazi
ideology, but forget that many of the killers were not Nazis or even
Germans. We think first of German Jews, although almost all of the Jews
killed in the Holocaust lived beyond Germany. We think of concentration
camps, though few of the murdered Jews ever saw one. We fault the state,
though murder was possible only where state institutions were destroyed.
We blame science, and so endorse an important element of Hitler’s
worldview. We fault nations, indulging in simplifications used by the
Nazis themselves.
We recall the victims, but are apt to confuse commemoration with
understanding. The memorial in the sixth district of Vienna is called
Remember for the Future. Should we be confident, now that a Holocaust
is behind us, that a recognizable future awaits? We share a world with the
forgotten perpetrators as well as with the memorialized victims. The
world is now changing, reviving fears that were familiar in Hitler’s time,
and to which Hitler responded. The history of the Holocaust is not over.
Its precedent is eternal, and its lessons have not yet been learned.
An instructive account of the mass murder of the Jews of Europe must
be planetary, because Hitler’s thought was ecological, treating Jews as a
wound of nature. Such a history must be colonial, since Hitler wanted
wars of extermination in neighboring lands where Jews lived. It must be
international, for Germans and others murdered Jews not in Germany
but in other countries. It must be chronological, in that Hitler’s rise to
power in Germany, only one part of the story, was followed by the

conquest of Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland, advances that
reformulated the Final Solution. It must be political, in a specific sense,
since the German destruction of neighboring states created zones where,
especially in the occupied Soviet Union, techniques of annihilation could
be invented. It must be multifocal, providing perspectives beyond those
of the Nazis themselves, using sources from all groups, from Jews and
non-Jews, throughout the zone of killing. This is not only a matter of
justice, but of understanding. Such a reckoning must also be human,
chronicling the attempt to survive as well as the attempt to murder,
describing Jews as they sought to live as well as those few non-Jews who
sought to help them, accepting the innate and irreducible complexity of
individuals and encounters.
A history of the Holocaust must be contemporary, permitting us to
experience what remains from the epoch of Hitler in our minds and in
our lives. Hitler’s worldview did not bring about the Holocaust by itself,
but its hidden coherence generated new sorts of destructive politics, and
new knowledge of the human capacity for mass murder. The precise
combination of ideology and circumstance of the year 1941 will not
appear again, but something like it might. Part of the effort to understand
the past is thus the effort needed to understand ourselves. The Holocaust
is not only history, but warning.

Introduction: Hitler’s World

Nothing can be known about the future, thought Hitler, except the limits
of our planet: “the surface area of a precisely measured space.” Ecology
was scarcity, and existence meant a struggle for land. The immutable
structure of life was the division of animals into species, condemned to
“inner seclusion” and an endless fight to the death. Human races, Hitler
was convinced, were like species. The highest races were still evolving
from the lower, which meant that interbreeding was possible but sinful.
Races should behave like species, like mating with like and seeking to kill
unlike. This for Hitler was a law, the law of racial struggle, as certain as
the law of gravity. The struggle could never end, and it had no certain
outcome. A race could triumph and flourish and could also be starved and
extinguished.
In Hitler’s world, the law of the jungle was the only law. People were to
suppress any inclination to be merciful and be as rapacious as they could.
Hitler thus broke with the traditions of political thought that presented
human beings as distinct from nature in their capacity to imagine and
create new forms of association. Beginning from that assumption,
political thinkers tried to describe not only the possible but the most just
forms of society. For Hitler, however, nature was the singular, brutal, and
overwhelming truth, and the whole history of attempting to think
otherwise was an illusion. Carl Schmitt, a leading Nazi legal theorist,
explained that politics arose not from history or concepts but from our
sense of enmity. Our racial enemies were chosen by nature, and our task
was to struggle and kill and die.
“Nature knows,” wrote Hitler, “no political boundaries. She places life
forms on this globe and then sets them free in a play for power.” Since
politics was nature, and nature was struggle, no political thought was
possible. This conclusion was an extreme articulation of the nineteenthcentury commonplace that human activities could be understood as

biology. In the 1880s and 1890s, serious thinkers and popularizers
influenced by Charles Darwin’s idea of natural selection proposed that
the ancient questions of political thought had been resolved by this
breakthrough in zoology. When Hitler was young, an interpretation of
Darwin in which competition was identified as a social good influenced
all major forms of politics. For Herbert Spencer, the British defender of
capitalism, a market was like an ecosphere where the strongest and best
survived. The utility brought by unhindered competition justified its
immediate evils. The opponents of capitalism, the socialists of the Second
International, also embraced biological analogies. They came to see the
class struggle as “scientific,” and man as one animal among many,
instead of a specially creative being with a specifically human essence.
Karl Kautsky, the leading Marxist theorist of the day, insisted
pedantically that people were animals.
Yet these liberals and socialists were constrained, whether they realized
it or not, by attachments to custom and institution; mental habits that
grew from social experience hindered them from reaching the most
radical of conclusions. They were ethically committed to goods such as
economic growth or social justice, and found it appealing or convenient
to imagine that natural competition would deliver these goods. Hitler
entitled his book Mein Kampf—My Struggle. From those two words
through two long volumes and two decades of political life, he was
endlessly narcissistic, pitilessly consistent, and exuberantly nihilistic
where others were not. The ceaseless strife of races was not an element of
life, but its essence. To say so was not to build a theory but to observe the
universe as it was. Struggle was life, not a means to some other end. It
was not justified by the prosperity (capitalism) or justice (socialism) that
it supposedly brought. Hitler’s point was not at all that the desirable end
justified the bloody means. There was no end, only meanness. Race was
real, whereas individuals and classes were fleeting and erroneous
constructions. Struggle was not a metaphor or an analogy, but a tangible
and total truth. The weak were to be dominated by the strong, since “the
world is not there for the cowardly peoples.” And that was all that there
was to be known and believed.
—

Hitler’s worldview dismissed religious and secular traditions, and yet
relied upon both. Though he was no original thinker, he supplied a
certain resolution to a crisis of both thought and faith. Like many before
him he sought to bring the two together. What he meant to engineer,
however, was not an elevating synthesis that would rescue both soul and
mind but a seductive collision that destroyed both. Hitler’s racial struggle
was supposedly sanctioned by science, but he called its object “daily
bread.” With these words, he was summoning one of the best-known
Christian texts, while profoundly altering its meaning. “Give us this day,”
ask those who recite the Lord’s Prayer, “our daily bread.” In the universe
the prayer describes, there is a metaphysics, an order beyond this planet,
notions of good that proceed from one sphere to another. Those saying
the Lord’s Prayer ask that God “forgive us our debts, as we also have
forgiven our debtors. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil.” In Hitler’s “struggle for the riches of nature,” it was a sin not to seize
everything possible, and a crime to allow others to survive. Mercy
violated the order of things because it allowed the weak to propagate.
Rejecting the biblical commandments, said Hitler, was what human
beings must do. “If I can accept a divine commandment,” he wrote, “it’s
this one: ‘Thou shalt preserve the species.’ ”
Hitler exploited images and tropes that were familiar to Christians:
God, prayers, original sin, commandments, prophets, chosen people,
messiahs—even the familiar Christian tripartite structure of time: first
paradise, then exodus, and finally redemption. We live in filth, and we
must strain to purify ourselves and the world so that we might return to
paradise. To see paradise as the battle of the species rather than the
concord of creation was to unite Christian longing with the apparent
realism of biology. The war of all against all was not terrifying
purposelessness, but instead the only purpose to be had in the universe.
Nature’s bounty was for man, as in Genesis, but only for the men who
follow nature’s law and fight for her. As in Genesis, so in My Struggle,
nature was a resource for man: but not for all people, only for triumphant
races. Eden was not a garden but a trench.
Knowledge of the body was not the problem, as in Genesis, but the
solution. The triumphant should copulate: After murder, Hitler thought,
the next human duty was sex and reproduction. In his scheme, the
original sin that led to the fall of man was of the mind and soul, not of the

body. For Hitler, our unhappy weakness was that we can think, realize
that others belonging to other races can do the same, and thereby
recognize them as fellow human beings. Humans left Hitler’s bloody
paradise not because of carnal knowledge. Humans left paradise because
of the knowledge of good and evil.
When paradise falls and humans are separated from nature, a
character who is neither human nor natural, such as the serpent of
Genesis, takes the blame. If humans were in fact nothing more than an
element of nature, and nature was known by science to be a bloody
struggle, something beyond nature must have corrupted the species. For
Hitler the bringer of the knowledge of good and evil on the earth, the
destroyer of Eden, was the Jew. It was the Jew who told humans that they
were above other animals, and had the capacity to decide their future for
themselves. It was the Jew who introduced the false distinction between
politics and nature, between humanity and struggle. Hitler’s destiny, as
he saw it, was to redeem the original sin of Jewish spirituality and restore
the paradise of blood. Since homo sapiens can survive only by
unrestrained racial killing, a Jewish triumph of reason over impulse
would mean the end of the species. What a race needed, thought Hitler,
was a “worldview” that permitted it to triumph, which meant, in the final
analysis, “faith” in its own mindless mission.
Hitler’s presentation of the Jewish threat revealed his particular
amalgamation of religious and zoological ideas. If the Jew triumphs,
Hitler wrote, “then his crown of victory will be the funeral wreath of the
human species.” On the one hand, Hitler’s image of a universe without
human beings accepted science’s verdict of an ancient planet on which
humanity had evolved. After the Jewish victory, he wrote, “earth will once
again wing its way through the universe entirely without humans, as was
the case millions of years ago.” At the same time, as he made clear in the
very same passage of My Struggle, this ancient earth of races and
extermination was the Creation of God. “Therefore I believe myself to be
acting according to the wishes of the Creator. Insofar as I restrain the
Jew, I am defending the work of the Lord.”
—
Hitler saw the species as divided into races, but denied that the Jews were

one. Jews were not a lower or a higher race, but a nonrace, or a
counterrace. Races followed nature and fought for land and food, whereas
Jews followed the alien logic of “un-nature.” They resisted nature’s basic
imperative by refusing to be satisfied by the conquest of a certain habitat,
and they persuaded others to behave similarly. They insisted on
dominating the entire planet and its peoples, and for this purpose
invented general ideas that draw the races away from the natural
struggle. The planet had nothing to offer except blood and soil, and yet
Jews uncannily generated concepts that allowed the world to be seen less
as an ecological trap and more as a human order. Ideas of political
reciprocity, practices in which humans recognize other humans as such,
came from Jews.
Hitler’s basic critique was not the usual one that human beings were
good but had been corrupted by an overly Jewish civilization. It was
rather that humans were animals and that any exercise of ethical
deliberation was in itself a sign of Jewish corruption. The very attempt to
set a universal ideal and strain towards it was precisely what was hateful.
Heinrich Himmler, Hitler’s most important deputy, did not follow every
twist of Hitler’s thinking, but he grasped the conclusions: Ethics as such
was the error; the only morality was fidelity to race. Participation in mass
murder, Himmler maintained, was a good act, since it brought to the race
an internal harmony as well as unity with nature. The difficulty of seeing,
for example, thousands of Jewish corpses marked the transcendence of
conventional morality. The temporary strains of murder were a worthy
sacrifice to the future of the race.
Any nonracist attitude was Jewish, thought Hitler, and any universal
idea a mechanism of Jewish dominion. Both capitalism and communism
were Jewish. Their apparent embrace of struggle was simply cover for the
Jewish desire for world domination. Any abstract idea of the state was
also Jewish. “There is no such thing,” wrote Hitler, “as the state as an end
in itself.” As he clarified, “the highest goal of human beings” was not “the
preservation of any given state or government, but the preservation of
their kind.” The frontiers of existing states would be washed away by the
forces of nature in the course of racial struggle: “One must not be
diverted from the borders of Eternal Right by the existence of political
borders.”
If states were not impressive human achievements but fragile barriers

to be overcome by nature, it followed that law was particular rather than
general, an artifact of racial superiority rather than an avenue of equality.
Hans Frank, Hitler’s personal lawyer and during the Second World War
the governor-general of occupied Poland, maintained that the law was
built “on the survival elements of our German people.” Legal traditions
based on anything beyond race were “bloodless abstractions.” Law had no
purpose beyond the codification of a Führer’s momentary intuitions
about the good of his race. The German concept of a Rechtsstaat, a state
that operated under the rule of law, was without substance. As Carl
Schmitt explained, law served the race, and the state served the race, and
so race was the only pertinent concept. The idea of a state held to external
legal standards was a sham designed to suppress the strong.
Insofar as universal ideas penetrated non-Jewish minds, claimed
Hitler, they weakened racial communities to the profit of Jews. The
content of various political ideas was beside the point, since all were
merely traps for fools. There were no Jewish liberals and no Jewish
nationalists, no Jewish messiahs and no Jewish Bolsheviks: “Bolshevism
is Christianity’s illegitimate child. Both are inventions of the Jew.” Hitler
saw Jesus as an enemy of Jews whose teachings had been perverted by
Paul to become one more false Jewish universalism, that of mercy to the
weak. From Saint Paul to Leon Trotsky, maintained Hitler, there were
only Jews who adopted various guises to seduce the naive. Ideas had no
historical origins and no connection to the succession of events or to the
creativity of individuals. They were simply tactical creations of the Jews,
and in this sense they were all the same.
Indeed, for Hitler there was no human history as such. “All worldhistorical events,” he claimed, “are nothing more than the expression of
the self-preservation drive of the races, for better or for worse.” What
must be registered from the past was the ceaseless attempt of Jews to
warp the structure of nature. This would continue so long as Jews
inhabited the earth. “It is Jewry,” wrote Hitler, “that always destroys this
order.” The strong should starve the weak, but Jews could arrange
matters so that the weak starve the strong. This was not an injustice in
the normal sense, but a violation of the logic of being. In a universe
warped by Jewish ideas, struggle could yield unthinkable outcomes: not
the survival of the fittest, but the starvation of the fittest.
From this it followed that Germans would always be victims so long as

Jews existed. As the highest race, Germans deserved the most and had
the most to lose. The unnatural power of Jews “murders the future.”
—
Though Hitler strove to define a world without history, his ideas were
altered by his own experiences. The First World War, the bloodiest in
history, fought on a continent that thought itself civilized, undid the
broad confidence among many Europeans that strife was all to the good.
Some Europeans of the Far Right or the Far Left, however, drew the
opposite lesson. The bloodshed, for them, had not been extensive enough,
and the sacrifice incomplete. For the Bolsheviks of the Russian Empire,
disciplined and voluntarist Marxists, the war and the revolutionary
energies it brought were the occasion to begin the socialist reconstruction
of the world. For Hitler, as for many other Germans, the war ended
before it was truly decided, the racial superiors taken from the battlefield
before they had earned their due. Of course, the sentiment that Germany
should win was widespread, and not only among militarists or extremists.
Thomas Mann, the greatest of the German writers and later an opponent
of Hitler, spoke of Germany’s “rights to domination, to participate in the
administration of the planet.” Edith Stein, a brilliant German philosopher
who developed a theory of empathy, considered “it out of the question
that we will now be defeated.” After Hitler came to power she was hunted
down in her convent and murdered as a Jew.
For Hitler, the conclusion of the First World War demonstrated the
ruin of the planet. Hitler’s understanding of its outcome went beyond the
nationalism of his fellow Germans, and his response to defeat only
superficially resembled the general resentment about lost territories. For
Hitler, the German defeat demonstrated that something was crooked in
the whole structure of the world; it was the proof that Jews had mastered
the methods of nature. If a few thousand German Jews had been gassed
at the beginning of the war, he maintained, Germany would have won. He
believed that Jews typically subjected their victims to starvation and saw
the British naval blockade of Germany during (and after) the First World
War as an application of this method. It was an instance of a permanent
condition and the proof of more suffering to come. So long as Jews
starved Germans rather than Germans starving whom they pleased, the

world was in disequilibrium.
From the defeat of 1918 Hitler drew conclusions about any future
conflict. Germans would always triumph if Jews were not involved. Yet
since Jews dominated the entire planet and had penetrated the minds of
Germans with their ideas, the struggle for German power must take two
forms. A war of simple conquest, no matter how devastatingly
triumphant, could never suffice. In addition to starving inferior races and
taking their land, Germans needed to simultaneously defeat the Jews,
whose global power and insidious universalism would undermine any
such healthy racial campaign. Thus Germans had the rights of the strong
against the weak, and the rights of the weak against the strong. As the
strong, they needed to dominate the weaker races they encountered; as
the weak, they had to liberate all races from Jewish domination. Hitler
thus united two great motivating forces of the world politics of his
century: colonialism and anti-colonialism.
Hitler saw both the struggle for land and the struggle against the Jews
in drastic, exterminatory terms, and yet he saw them differently. The
struggle against inferior races for territory was a matter of the control of
parts of the earth’s surface. The struggle against the Jews was ecological,
since it concerned not a specific racial enemy or territory but the
conditions of life on earth. The Jews were “a pestilence, a spiritual
pestilence, worse than the Black Death.” Since they fought with ideas,
their power was everywhere, and anyone could be their knowing or
unknowing agent. The only way to remove such a plague was to eradicate
it at the source. “If Nature designed the Jew to be the material cause of
the decline and fall of nations,” wrote Hitler, “it provided these nations
with the possibility of a healthy reaction.” The elimination had to be
complete: If one Jewish family remained in Europe, it could infect the
entire continent.
The fall of man could be undone; the planet could be healed. “A people
that is rid of its Jews,” said Hitler, “returns spontaneously to the natural
order.”
—
Hitler’s views of human life and the natural order were total and circular.
All questions about politics were answered as if they were questions

about nature; all questions about nature were answered by reference back
to politics. The circle was drawn by Hitler himself. If politics and nature
were not sources of experience and perspective but empty stereotypes
that exist only in relation to each other, then all power rested in the hands
of he who circulated the clichés. Reason was replaced by references,
argumentation by incantation. The “struggle,” as the title of the book gave
away, was “mine”: Hitler’s. The totalistic idea of life as struggle placed all
power to interpret any event in the mind of its author.
Equating nature and politics abolished not only political but also
scientific thought. For Hitler, science was a completed revelation of the
law of racial struggle, a finished gospel of bloodshed, not a process of
hypothesis and experiment. It provided a vocabulary about zoological
conflict, not a fount of concepts and procedures that allowed ever more
extensive understanding. It had an answer but no questions. The task of
man was to submit to this creed, rather than willfully impose specious
Jewish thinking upon nature. Because Hitler’s worldview required a
single circular truth that embraced everything, it was vulnerable to the
simplest of pluralisms: for example, that humans might change their
environment in ways that might, in turn, change society. If science could
change the ecosystem such that human behavior was altered, then all of
his claims were groundless. Hitler’s logical circle, in which society was
nature because nature was society, in which men were beasts because
beasts were men, would be broken.
Hitler accepted that scientists and specialists had purposes within the
racial community: to manufacture weapons, to improve communications,
to advance hygiene. Stronger races should have better guns, better radios,
and better health, the better to dominate the weaker. He saw this as a
fulfillment of nature’s command to struggle, not as a violation of its laws.
Technical achievement was proof of racial superiority, not evidence of the
advance of general scientific understanding. “Everything that we today
admire on this earth,” wrote Hitler, “the scholarship and art, the
technology and inventions, are nothing more than the creative product of
a few peoples, and perhaps originally of a single race.” No race, however
advanced, could change the basic structure of nature by any innovation.
Nature had only two variants: the paradise in which higher races
slaughter the lower, and the fallen world in which supernatural Jews
deny higher races the bounty they are due and starve them when possible.

Hitler understood that agricultural science posed a specific threat to
the logic of his system. If humans could intervene in nature to create
more food without taking more land, his whole system collapsed. He
therefore denied the importance of what was happening before his eyes,
the science of what was later called the “Green Revolution”: the
hybridization of grains, the distribution of chemical fertilizers and
pesticides, the expansion of irrigation. Even “in the best case,” he
insisted, hunger must outstrip crop improvements. There was “a limit” to
all scientific improvements. Indeed, all of “the scientific methods of land
management” had already been tried and had failed. There was no
conceivable improvement, now or in the future, that would allow
Germans to be fed “from their own land and territory.” Food could only
be safeguarded by conquest of fertile territory, not by science that would
make German territory more fertile. Jews deliberately encouraged the
contrary belief in order to dampen the German appetite for conquest and
prepare the German people for destruction. “It is always the Jew,” wrote
Hitler in this connection, “who seeks and succeeds in implanting such
lethal ways of thinking.”
Hitler had to defend his system from human discovery, which was as
much of a problem for him as human solidarity. Science could not save
the species because, in the final analysis, all ideas were racial, nothing
more than aesthetic derivatives of struggle. The contrary notion, that
ideas could actually reflect nature or change it, was a “Jewish lie” and a
“Jewish swindle.” Hitler maintained that “man has never conquered
nature in any matter.” Universal science, like universal politics, must be
seen not as human promise but as Jewish threat.
The world’s problem, as Hitler saw it, was that Jews falsely separated
science and politics and made delusive promises for progress and
humanity. The solution he proposed was to expose Jews to the brutal
reality that nature and society were one and the same. They should be
separated from other people and forced to inhabit some bleak and
inhospitable territory. Jews were powerful in that their “un-nature” drew
others to them. They were weak in that they could not face brutal reality.
Resettled to some exotic locale, they would be unable to manipulate
others with their unearthly concepts, and would succumb to the law of
the jungle. Hitler’s first obsession was an extreme natural setting, “an
anarchic state on an island.” Later his thoughts turned to the wastes of

Siberia. It was “a matter of indifference,” he said, whether Jews were sent
to one or the other.
In August 1941, about a month after Hitler made that remark, his men
began to shoot Jews in massacres on the scale of tens of thousands at a
time, in the middle of Europe, in a setting they had themselves made
anarchic, over pits dug in the black earth of Ukraine.

1
Living Space

Although Hitler’s premise was that humans were simply animals, his own
very human intuition allowed him to transform his zoological theory into
a kind of political worldview. The racial struggle for survival was also a
German campaign for dignity, he maintained, and the restraints were not
only biological but British. Hitler understood that Germans were not, in
their daily life, beasts who scratched food from the ground. As he
developed his thought in his Second Book, composed in 1928, he made
clear that securing a regular food supply was not simply a matter of
physical sustenance, but also a requirement for a sense of control. The
problem with the British naval blockade during the First World War had
not simply been the diseases and death it brought during the conflict and
in the months between armistice and final settlement. The blockade had
forced middle-class Germans to break the law in order to acquire the food
that they needed or felt that they needed, leaving them personally
insecure and distrustful of authority.
The world political economy of the 1920s and 1930s was, as Hitler
understood, structured by British naval power. British advocacy of free
trade, he believed, was political cover for British domination of the world.
It made sense for the British to parlay the fiction that free exchange
meant access to food for everyone, because such a belief would
discourage others from trying to compete with the British navy. In fact,
only the British could defend their own supply lines in the event of a
crisis, and could by the same token prevent food from reaching others.
Thus the British blockaded their enemies during war—an obvious
violation of their own ideology of free trade. This capacity to assure and
deny food, Hitler emphasized, was a form of power. Hitler called the

absence of food security for everyone except the British the “peaceful
economic war.”
Hitler understood that Germany did not feed itself from its own
territory in the 1920s and 1930s, but also knew that Germans would not
actually have starved if they had tried. Germany could have generated the
calories to feed its population from German soil, but only by sacrificing
some of its industry, exports, and foreign currency. A prosperous
Germany required exchange with the British world, but this trade pattern
could be supplemented, thought Hitler, by the conquest of a land empire
that would even the scales between London and Berlin. Once it had
gained the appropriate colonies, Germany could preserve its industrial
excellence while shifting its dependence for food from the Britishcontrolled sea lanes to its own imperial hinterland. If Germany controlled
enough territory, Germans could have the kinds and the amounts of food
that they desired, with no cost to German industry. A sufficiently large
German empire could become self-sufficient, an “autarkic economy.”
Hitler romanticized the German peasant, not as a peaceful tiller of the
soil, but as the heroic tamer of distant lands.
The British were to be respected as racial kindred and builders of a
great empire. The idea was to slip through their network of power
without forcing them to respond. Taking land from others would not, or
so Hitler imagined, threaten the great maritime empire. Over the long
term, he expected peace with Great Britain “on the basis of the division of
the world.” He expected that Germany could become a world power while
avoiding an “Armageddon with England.” This was, for him, a reassuring
thought.
It was also reassuring that such an alteration of the world order, such a
reglobalization, had been achieved before, in recent memory. For
generations of German imperialists, and for Hitler himself, the exemplary
land empire was the United States of America.
—
America taught Hitler that need blurred into desire, and that desire arose
from comparison. Germans were not only animals seeking nourishment
to survive, and not only a society yearning for security in an
unpredictable British global economy. Families observed other families:

around the corner, but also, thanks to modern media, around the world.
Ideas of how life should be lived escaped measures such as survival,
security, and even comfort as standards of living became comparative,
and as comparisons became international. “Through modern technology
and the communication it enables,” wrote Hitler, “international relations
between peoples have become so effortless and intimate that Europeans—
often without realizing it—take the circumstances of American life as the
benchmark for their own lives.”
Globalization led Hitler to the American dream. Behind every
imaginary German racial warrior stood an imaginary German woman
who wanted ever more. In American idiom, this notion that the standard
of living was relative, based upon the perceived success of others, was
called “keeping up with the Joneses.” In his more strident moments,
Hitler urged Germans to be more like ants and finches, thinking only of
survival and reproduction. Yet his own scarcely hidden fear was a very
human one, perhaps even a very male one: the German housewife. It was
she who raised the bar of the natural struggle ever higher. Before the First
World War, when Hitler was a young man, German colonial rhetoric had
played on the double meaning of the word Wirtschaft: both a household
and an economy. German women had been instructed to equate comfort
and empire. And since comfort was always relative, the political
justification for colonies was inexhaustible. If the German housewife’s
point of reference was Mrs. Jones rather than Frau Jonas, then Germans
needed an empire comparable to the American one. German men would
have to struggle and die at some distant frontier, redeeming their race
and the planet, while women supported their men, embodying the
merciless logic of endless desire for ever more prosperous homes.
The inevitable presence of America in German minds was the final
reason why, for Hitler, science could not solve the problem of sustenance.
Even if inventions did improve agricultural productivity, Germany could
not keep pace with America on the strength of this alone. Technology
could be taken for granted on both sides; the quantity of arable land was
the variable. Germany therefore needed as much land as the Americans
and as much technology. Hitler proclaimed that permanent struggle for
land was nature’s wish, but he also understood that a human desire for
increasing relative comfort could also generate perpetual motion.
If German prosperity would always be relative, then final success could

never be achieved. “The prospects for the German people are bleak,”
wrote an aggrieved Hitler. That complaint was followed by this
clarification: “Neither the current living space nor that achieved through
a restoration of the borders of 1914 permits us to lead a life comparable to
that of the American people.” At the least, the struggle would continue as
long as the United States existed, and that would be a long time. Hitler
saw America as the coming world power, and the core American
population (“the racially pure and uncorrupted German”) as a “world
class people” that was “younger and healthier than the Germans” who
had remained in Europe.
—
While Hitler was writing My Struggle, he learned of the word
Lebensraum (living space) and turned it to his own purposes. In his
writings and speeches it expressed the whole range of meaning that he
attached to the natural struggle, from an unceasing racial fight for
physical survival all the way to an endless war for the subjective sense of
having the highest standard of living in the world. The term Lebensraum
came into the German language as the equivalent of the French word
biotope, or “habitat.” In a social rather than biological context it can
mean something else: household comfort, something close to “living
room.” The containment of these two meanings in a single word
furthered Hitler’s circular idea: Nature was nothing more than society,
society nothing more than nature. Thus there was no difference between
an animal struggle for physical existence and the preference of families
for nicer lives. Each was about Lebensraum.
The twentieth century was to bring endless war for relative comfort.
Robert Ley, one of Hitler’s early Nazi comrades, defined Lebensraum as
“more culture, more beauty—these the race must have, or it will perish.”
Hitler’s propagandist Joseph Goebbels defined the purpose of a war of
extermination as “a big breakfast, a big lunch, and a big dinner.” Tens of
millions of people would have to starve, but not so that Germans could
survive in the physical sense of the word. Tens of millions of people
would have to starve so that Germans could strive for a standard of living
second to none.

—
“One thing the Americans have and which we lack,” complained Hitler,
“is the sense of vast open spaces.” He was repeating what German
colonialists had said for decades. By the time Germany had unified in
1871, the world had already been colonized by other European powers.
Germany’s defeat in the First World War cost it the few overseas
possessions it had gained. So where, in the twentieth century, were the
lands open for German conquest? Where was Germany’s frontier, its
Manifest Destiny?
All that remained was the home continent. “For Germany,” wrote
Hitler, “the only possibility of a sound agrarian policy was the acquisition
of land within Europe itself.” To be sure, there was no place near
Germany that was uninhabited or even underpopulated. The crucial thing
was to imagine that European “spaces” were, in fact, “open.” Racism was
the idea that turned populated lands into potential colonies, and the
source mythologies for racists arose from the recent colonization of North
America and Africa. The conquest and exploitation of these continents by
Europeans formed the literary imagination of Europeans of Hitler’s
generation. Like millions of other children born in the 1880s and 1890s,
Hitler played at African wars and read Karl May’s novels of the American
West. Hitler said that May had opened his “eyes to the world.”
In the late nineteenth century, Germans tended to see the fate of Native
Americans as a natural precedent for the fate of native Africans under
their control. One colony was German East Africa—today Rwanda,
Burundi, Tanzania, and a bit of Mozambique—where Berlin assumed
responsibility in 1891. During an uprising in 1905, the Maji Maji
rebellion, the Germans applied starvation tactics, killing at least seventyfive thousand people. A second colony was German Southwest Africa,
today Namibia, where about three thousand German colonists controlled
about seventy percent of the land. An uprising there in 1904 led the
Germans to deny the native Herero and Nama populations access to
water until they fell “victim to the nature of their own country,” as the
official military history put it. The Germans imprisoned survivors in a
camp on an island. The Herero population was reduced from some eighty
thousand to about fifteen thousand; that of the Nama from about twenty
thousand to about ten thousand. For the German general who pursued

these policies, the historical justice was self-evident. “The natives must
give way,” he said. “Look at America.” The German governor of the region
compared Southwest Africa to Nevada, Wyoming, and Colorado. The
civilian head of the German colonial office saw matters much the same
way: “The history of the colonization of the United States, clearly the
biggest colonial endeavor the world has ever known, had as its first act
the complete annihilation of its native peoples.” He understood the need
for an “annihilation operation.” The German state geologist called for a
“Final Solution to the native question.”
A famous German novel of the war in German Southwest Africa united,
as would Hitler, the idea of a racial struggle with that of divine justice.
The killing of “blacks” was “the justice of the Lord” because the world
belonged to “the most vigorous.” Like most Europeans, Hitler was a racist
about Africans. He proclaimed that the French were “niggerizing” their
blood through intermarriage. He shared in the general European
excitement about the French use of African troops in the occupation of
Germany’s Rhineland district after the First World War. Yet Hitler’s
racism was not that of a European looking down at Africans. He saw the
entire world as an “Africa,” and everyone, including Europeans, in racial
terms. Here, as so often, he was more consistent than others. Racism,
after all, was a claim to judge who was fully human. As such, ideas of
racial superiority and inferiority could be applied according to desire and
convenience. Even neighboring societies, which might seem not so
different from the German, might be defined as racially different.
When Hitler wrote in My Struggle that Germany’s only opportunity for
colonization was Europe, he discarded as impractical the possibility of a
return to Africa. The search for racial inferiors to dominate required no
long voyages by sea, since they were present in eastern Europe as well. In
the nineteenth century, after all, the major arena of German colonialism
had been not mysterious Africa but neighboring Poland. Prussia had
gained territory inhabited by Poles in the partitions of the PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in the late eighteenth century. Formerly
Polish lands were thus part of the unified Germany that Prussia created
in 1871. Poles made up about seven percent of the German population,
and in eastern regions were a majority. They were subjected first to
Bismarck’s Kulturkampf, a campaign against Roman Catholicism whose
major object was the elimination of Polish national identity, and then to

state-subsidized internal colonization campaigns. A German colonial
literature about Poland, including best sellers, portrayed the Poles as
“black.” The Polish peasants had dark faces and referred to Germans as
“white.” Polish aristocrats, fey and useless, were endowed with black hair
and eyes. So were the beautiful Polish women, seductresses who, in these
stories, almost invariably led naive German men to racial selfdegradation and doom.
During the First World War, Germany lost Southwest Africa. In eastern
Europe the situation was different. Here German arms seemed to be
assembling, between 1916 and 1918, a vast new realm for domination and
economic exploitation. First Germany joined its prewar Polish territories
to those taken from the Russian Empire to form a subordinate Polish
kingdom, which was to be ruled by a friendly monarch. The postwar plan
was to expropriate and deport all of the Polish landholders near the
German-Polish border. In early 1918, after the Bolshevik Revolution had
taken Russia from the war, Germany established a chain of vassal states
to the east of Poland, from the Baltic to the Black Sea, the largest of which
was Ukraine. Germany lost the war in France in 1918, but was never
finally defeated on the battlefield in eastern Europe. This new east
European realm was abandoned without, it could seem to Germans, ever
having been truly lost.
The complete loss of the African colonies during and after the war
created the possibility for a vague and malleable nostalgia about racial
mastery. Popular novels about Africa with titles such as Master, Come
Back! could make sense only after such a complete break. Germans could
continue to see themselves as good colonizers, even as the realm of
colonization itself became fluid and vague, projected into the future.
Hans Grimm’s novel A People Without Space, which sold half a million
copies in Germany before the Second World War, concerned the plight of
a German who had left Africa only to be frustrated by confinement within
a small Germany and an unjust European system.
The problem suggested its own solution. Since racism was an asserted
hierarchy of rights to the planet, it could be applied to Europeans who
lived east of Germany. Africa as a place was lost, but “Africa” as a form of
thinking could be universalized. The experience in eastern Europe had
established that neighbors could also be “black.” Europeans could be
imagined to want “masters” and yield “space.” After the war, it was more

practical to consider a return to eastern Europe than to Africa. Here, as in
so many other cases, Hitler drew vague sentiments to remorselessly tight
conclusions. He presented as racial inferiors the largest cultural group in
Europe, Germany’s eastern neighbors, the Slavs.
—
“The Slavs are born as a slavish mass,” wrote Hitler, “crying out for their
master.” He meant primarily the Ukrainians, who inhabited a stretch of
very fertile land, as well as their neighbors—Russians, Belarusians, and
Poles. “I need the Ukraine,” he stated, “in order that no one is able to
starve us again, like in the last war.” The conquest of Ukraine would
guarantee “a way of life for our people through the allocation of
Lebensraum for the next hundred years.” This was a matter of natural
justice: “It is inconceivable that a higher people should painfully exist on
a soil too narrow for it, whilst amorphous masses, which contribute
nothing to civilization, occupy infinite tracts of a soil that is one of the
richest in the world.” As their land was taken, Ukrainians could be given,
said Hitler, “scarves, glass beads, and everything that colonial peoples
like.” A single loudspeaker in each village would “give them plenty of
opportunities to dance, and the villagers will be grateful to us.” Nazi
propaganda would simply remove Ukrainians from view. A Nazi song for
female colonists described Ukraine thus: “There are neither farms nor
hearths, there the earth cries out for the plough.” Erich Koch, chosen by
Hitler to rule Ukraine, made the point about the inferiority of Ukrainians
with a certain simplicity: “If I find a Ukrainian who is worthy to sit with
me at table, I must have him shot.” Even in the racial murder threats, the
dining room was the backdrop.
When German occupation came in 1941, Ukrainians themselves made
the connection to Africa and America. A Ukrainian woman, literate and
reflective in a way that Nazi racism could not have contemplated,
recorded in her diary: “We are like slaves. Often the book Uncle Tom’s
Cabin comes to mind. Once we shed tears over those Negroes, now
obviously we ourselves are experiencing the same thing.” Yet in one
respect, colonialism in eastern Europe had to differ from the American
slave trade or the conquest of Africa. It required two feats of imagination:
the wishing away not just of peoples but also of political entities that were

similar to the German state. Hitler’s preoccupation with the racial
struggle for nature occluded both nations and their governments. It was
always legitimate to destroy states; if they were destroyed, that meant
that they should have been destroyed.
Some states, claimed Hitler, were inviting attack. Lower races were
incapable of state building, so what appeared to be their governments
was illusory—a façade for Jewish power. Hitler maintained that the Slavs
had never governed themselves. The lands east of Germany had always
been ruled by “foreign elements.” The Russian Empire had been the
creation of an “essentially German upper class and intelligentsia.”
Without this tradition of German leadership, “the Russians would still be
living like rabbits.” Ukrainians were by nature a colonial people and, as
German colonial administrators would say, “blacks.” After Germany was
forced in 1918 to withdraw its troops and cede its new empire, most of
Ukraine, like most of the lands of the Russian Empire, was consolidated
within a new communist state known as the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics (Soviet Union, USSR). Hitler claimed that the USSR was an
expression of a Jewish “worldview.” The idea of communism was simply a
deception that led Slavs to accept their “new leadership in Jewry.”
Communism was the proximate example of Hitler’s claim that all
universal ideas were Jewish and all Jews were the servants of universal
ideas. The proclaimed identity of Jews with communism—the
Judeobolshevik myth—was for Hitler the apposite demonstration of both
the supernatural strength and the earthly weakness of Jews. It
demonstrated that Jews could win destructive power over the masses
with their unnatural ideas. “Bolshevism of international Jewry attempts
from its control point in Soviet Russia to rot away the very core of the
nations of the world,” he wrote. Yet this apparent misfortune was in fact
an opportunity. In killing the strongest members of the Slavic races inside
the Soviet Union, Jews were doing the work that Germans would have to
do in any event. Jewish communism was in this sense, Hitler wrote,
“fortunate for the future.” The Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, thought
Hitler, was therefore “merely a preparation” for the later return of
“German domination.”
Hitler’s interpretation of the Bolshevik Revolution as a Jewish project
was far from unusual: Winston Churchill and Woodrow Wilson saw it the
same way, at least at first. A Times of London correspondent saw Jews as

the leading force of the world Bolshevik conspiracy. What was unusual
was Hitler’s relentlessly systematic conclusion that Germany could gain
global power by eliminating east European Jews and overturning their
supposed Soviet citadel. This was nothing more than self-defense, he
maintained, since Bolshevism’s victory by whatever insidious means
would bring the “destruction, indeed the final extermination, of the
German people.” In a direct confrontation, though, the Jewish threat
could be eliminated. The destruction of Soviet Jews would cause the
Soviet Union to “immediately break up.” It would prove to be a “house of
cards” or a “giant with feet of clay.” The Slavs would fight “like Indians,”
with the same result. Then, in the East, “a similar process will repeat
itself for the second time, as in the conquest of America.” A second
America could be created in Europe, after Germans learned to see other
Europeans as they saw indigenous Americans or Africans, and learned to
regard Europe’s largest state as a fragile Jewish colony.

In this racist collage Europeans were interspersed with Africans and
Native Americans. Hitler compressed all of imperial history and a total
racism into a very short formulation: “Our Mississippi must be the Volga,

and not the Niger.” The Niger River, in Africa, was no longer accessible to
German imperialism after 1918, but Africa remained a fount of the
images and the colonial longing. The Volga, the eastern border of Europe,
was where Hitler imagined the outer limit of German power. The
Mississippi was not only the river that runs from north to south through
the middle of the United States. It was also the line beyond which
Thomas Jefferson wanted all Indians expelled. “Who,” asked Hitler,
“remembers the Red Indians?” For Hitler, Africa was the source of the
imperial references but not the actual site of empire; eastern Europe was
that actual site, and it was to be remade just as North America had been
remade.
The destruction of the Soviet Union, thought Hitler, would allow the
right master race to starve the right subhumans for the right reasons.
Once the Germans replaced the Jews as the colonial masters, food from
Ukraine could be directed away from the useless Soviet populations
towards grateful German cities and a submissive Europe. Hitler’s axiom
that life was a starvation war and his proposal for a hunger campaign
against the Slavs were reflected in policy documents formulated after his
rise to power in Germany in 1933. A Hunger Plan created under the
authority of Hermann Göring foresaw that “many tens of millions of
people in this territory will become superfluous and will die or must
emigrate to Siberia.” Then, according to a second round of plans,
designed under the authority of Heinrich Himmler, colonization by
Germans could begin.
The Judeobolshevik conception allowed Hitler’s portrait of a planetary
ecosystem polluted by Jewish ideas to crystallize as planning. The
Judeobolshevik myth seemed to define the point where the application of
German force could win an empire and restore the planet. It also
permitted a politics of war and extermination that would be decisive for
Jews and, in a different way, for Germans. The idea that Jewish power
was global and ideological seemed to make the Jewish hold on territory
weaker rather than stronger. If Jews could be eliminated, then they could
no longer purvey their false ideas of human solidarity, and would have to
yield their planetary dominion. Thus the Judeobolshevik myth courted
the warriors by promising an easy triumph.
If the war did not proceed as planned, if the Soviet Union could not be
so easily destroyed, then the idea of Jewish hegemony over the entire

planet could return to the forefront of rhetoric and policy. If the Jews
were not weakened by a first strike on Soviet territory, then the war
against them would have to be escalated. If Germany had to fight a global
enemy, there would seem to be no alternative to a total campaign against
Jews, since in a long war the Jews could strike from any point at any
time. The Jews behind the lines, in places under German control, would
have to be exterminated. This latent potential within Hitler’s ideas was
realized in practice: Jews were not killed in large numbers first in Berlin,
but on the frontiers of German power in the Soviet East. As the tide of
war turned, the mass killing moved west from the occupied Soviet Union
to occupied Poland and then to the rest of Europe.
The Judeobolshevik myth seemed to justify a preemptive strike on a
certain valuable territory against an inherently planetary enemy. It linked
the elimination of the Jews to the subjugation of the Slavs. If this
connection could be established in theory and Germans thrust eastward
into war, Hitler could hardly fail in practice. Failure to conquer Slavs
would make the case for exterminating Jews.
—
The Judeobolshevik idea, a major source of the Second World War, had
its origins in the First. It reached Hitler’s mind after a peculiar German
experience during the collapse of the Russian Empire, on the eastern
front of the First World War.
From the perspective of Berlin, the First World War was fought on a
western front against France (and Britain, and later the United States)
and on an eastern front against the Russian Empire. Germany was
surrounded by enemies on both sides and had to try to eliminate one
quickly in order to defeat the other. The attack on France in 1914 failed,
condemning Germans to a long two-front war. Under these
circumstances, German diplomats sought nonmilitary means of removing
the Russian Empire from the conflict, such as fomenting revolution. In
April 1917, after a first revolution in Russia had already taken place,
Germany arranged the transport of Vladimir Lenin, the leader of the
Bolsheviks, from Zurich to Petrograd in a sealed train. He succeeded,
along with his comrades, in organizing a second revolution in November.
He then withdrew the Russian Empire from the war. This appeared at

first to be a tremendous German victory.
Before the revolutions of 1917, the Russian Empire had been the
homeland of more Jews than any other country in the world—and an
actively antisemitic state. Jews were subject to official forms of
discrimination and targeted in pogroms of increasing intensity and
frequency. These were not organized by the state, but the Russian
imperial subjects who perpetrated them believed that they were following
the will of the tsar. Jews were almost two hundred times more likely than
ethnic Russians to emigrate from the Russian Empire, in part because
they were more likely to want to leave, and in part because imperial
authorities were glad to see them go. During the First World War, Jews
were largely excluded from the body politic.
Jews inhabited the western regions of the Russian Empire, through
which Russian imperial soldiers advanced and retreated as they engaged
their German and Austrian enemies. As Russian troops marched into the
lands of the Habsburg monarchy in autumn 1914, they found Jews who
owned farms (which was illegal in the Russian Empire) and promptly
expropriated them. In January 1915, official imperial circulars blamed
Jews for sabotage. That month the Russian imperial army expelled some
hundred thousand Jews from forty towns near Warsaw. Local Poles took
the Jews’ property and kept it. When the Germans drove the Russians
back east in 1915, Russian imperial soldiers blamed Jews and carried out
about a hundred pogroms. The head of the right faction of the Russian
parliament (later the minister of internal affairs) explained setbacks by
referring to the plans of an international Jewish oligarchy. Meanwhile,
the Russian Empire deported about half a million Jews from their homes,
on the logic that they might collaborate with the invaders. The army was
the agent of deportations, so soldiers and officers could loot Jews, their
fellow Russian imperial subjects. This mass expulsion from the Jewish
heartland, accompanied by systematic theft and frequent violence, was
one of the greatest disruptions of traditional Jewish life in history.
In the minds of Europeans, the Russian deportation altered the Jewish
question. Tens of thousands of Jews fled the Russian Empire, creating an
impression in European cities that Jews from the East were suddenly
everywhere. The deportations shaped the lives of many of the major
Jewish revolutionaries of the twentieth century, both of the Right and the
Left. As very young boys both Menachem Begin and Avraham Stern, later

right-wing radicals, were displaced. Within the Russian Empire, Jews
deported from the front made for the major cities, such as Moscow,
Petrograd, and Kyiv, where they were often shunned as spies and denied
employment and shelter. After the February 1917 Revolution, as the
empire lurched towards becoming a republic, the Jews were formally
emancipated and became citizens. Of the sixty thousand or so Jews in
Moscow at this time, about half were refugees. Many of them joined
Lenin in his second Russian revolution that November. Lenin thanked
Jews for their decisive support in the city that he would make his capital.
As of November 1917, Jews were suddenly equal members of a new
revolutionary state rather than a repressed religious minority in an
empire. The vast majority of Jews tried in 1918 to return to their homes,
only to find them, very frequently, inhabited by other people. The Jews’
neighbors did not want to return what they had taken, and often attacked
the Jews instead. As one regime gave way to another, Jews were targeted
by everyone involved. The first pogroms after the revolution were carried
out by the Red Army; but the ideology of their commanders was
internationalist, and officers usually tried to stop anti-Jewish violence.
The other side generally did not show such restraint. The men who
took up arms against Lenin’s revolution represented no coherent
movement; the closest thing to an ideology of counterrevolution was
antisemitism. Opponents of the new regime, seeking to draw support
from the population, wed traditional religious antisemitism to a present
sense of threat, portraying the Bolsheviks as a modern Satan. As the civil
war ground on, killing millions of people, journalists and propagandists
who opposed revolution developed the Judeobolshevik myth. They drew
some of their ideas from the Protocols of the Elders of Zion. The notion of
global Jewish power seemed to explain the double catastrophe of
revolution and military defeat. It transformed the victory of a universal
over a national idea into a plot of an identifiable group of people who
could be punished.
—
Germany backed the revolutionaries in 1917, only to find itself on the side
of the counterrevolutionaries not long thereafter. During the chaos that
followed Lenin’s revolution, Germany was able to build a chain of client

states between the Baltic and the Black Sea. The most important of these
was Ukraine. The German plan for 1918 was to recall troops from the east
to fight a final battle on the western front while feeding Germans from
Ukrainian grain. The Germans called the treaty they signed with the
Ukrainian state in February 1918 the “Bread Peace,” and it was very
popular in Germany. German troops quickly drove the Red Army from
Ukraine. But the scheme to exploit the country to win the war failed, not
least because of the resistance of Ukrainian peasants, militias, and
political parties. Nevertheless, much of Ukraine was, for a memorable six
months in 1918, something like a German colony. The image of a
Ukrainian cornucopia penetrated German minds at a time of blockade
and hunger.

Once Germany was defeated on the western front and forced to sign an
armistice in November 1918, Lenin’s commissar for war, Leon Trotsky,
turned his attention to Germany’s abandoned client states in what had
been the western reaches of the Russian Empire. In Latvia, Lithuania,
Belarus, and Ukraine, German officers and soldiers remained to fight
against Trotsky’s Red Army. Ukraine in 1919 collapsed into a complicated
civil war in which some hundred thousand Jews were murdered by
soldiers on all sides: Bolsheviks, the anti-Bolshevik armies known as the
Whites, and above all soldiers of the independent Ukrainian state. Most
of these perpetrators, regardless of their identities or loyalties, had
learned violence against Jews in the Russian imperial army. Very often
their Jewish victims were people who had been deported during the war
by the Russian imperial policy and therefore lacked security and
connections where they were.
The vanquished adherents of the Judeobolshevik thesis were among
the hundreds of thousands of defeated Russian imperial subjects who

flooded defeated Germany. One of them brought a copy of the Protocols
of the Elders of Zion, which appeared in German translation in January
1920. Among those fleeing Lenin’s triumph were Germans from the Baltic
region who could convey the Judeobolshevik idea in German without a
text. These included Max Erwin von Scheubner-Richter and Alfred
Rosenberg, two early Nazi influences on Hitler. In 1919 and 1920, having
spoken with people who knew the Protocols and having read the
Protocols himself, Hitler assimilated the Judeobolshevik myth and the
notion that Jews kill by starvation. These ideas were at the time a matter
of intense debate. In July 1920, the representative of Soviet power in
Berlin claimed that most Jews were bourgeois, had opposed the
revolution, and had no future on Soviet territory. They would not rule but
be “destroyed.” This perspective could not persuade Germans who were
seeking a single key to the revolutionary moment, one that could be
turned either way, toward revolution or counterrevolution. At this very
moment, Scheubner-Richter was in Munich gathering money and men to
mount an armed expedition against the Bolsheviks, with special emphasis
on liberating Ukraine.
The Judeobolshevik idea has a specific historical origin: an extension of
the antisemitism of official Russia, an adaptation of Christian apocalyptic
visions during a time of crisis, an explanation of the collapse of the
ancient imperial order, a battle cry during a civil war, and a form of
consolation after defeat. When the Nazi movement began, armed
counterrevolution was under way in Russia and Ukraine, and its victory
was still a real prospect in the minds of people who mattered to Hitler.
For a brief moment in 1920, the Red Army seemed to be on its way to
Germany. As the soldiers of Bolshevism advanced on Warsaw that
August, it seemed that a final confrontation of the forces of revolution
and counterrevolution would soon take place. But after a surprising and
decisive Polish victory in that battle and the war, and with the
consolidation of the European system that followed in 1921, the character
of the problem changed.
Scheubner-Richter’s attempt to assemble an anti-Bolshevik army
collapsed in 1922. When he marched arm in arm with Hitler in Munich in
1923, the Nazi putsch was, for him, a final lurch towards the East. When
Scheubner-Richter was killed and Hitler was imprisoned, some Nazis saw
the failure as a triumph not so much of the young Weimar Republic in

Germany as of the Judeobolshevik power they believed they were
opposing. As Hitler composed My Struggle in prison in 1924, the
Bolsheviks became less a concrete group of political rivals and more a
way to connect his ideas about Jews to a piece of territory. For Hitler,
who knew little about the Russian Empire, and who thought in grand
abstractions, the Judeobolshevik idea was not the end of a Russian
struggle but the beginning of a German crusade, not a myth arising from
painful events but the glimmering light of eternal truth.
The Judeobolshevik myth seemed to provide the missing piece of
Hitler’s entire scheme, uniting the local with the planetary, the promise of
victorious colonial war against Slavs with a glorious anti-colonial struggle
against Jews. A single attack on a single state, the Soviet Union, could
solve all the problems of the Germans at the same time. The destruction
of Soviet Jews would mean the removal of Jewish power, which would
allow the creation of an eastern empire, which would mean the replay of
American frontier history in eastern Europe. The racial German empire
would revise the global order and begin the restoration of nature on a
planet polluted by Jews. If the war was won, Jews could be eliminated as
convenient. If Germans were somehow held back by inferior Slavs, then
Jews would bear the consequences. Either way, the pursuit of racial
empire would bring the politics of Jewish eradication.
—
In Hitler’s ecology, the planet was despoiled by the presence of Jews, who
defied the laws of nature by introducing corrupting ideas. The solution
was to expose Jews to a purified nature, a place where bloody struggle
rather than abstract thought mattered, where Jews could not manipulate
others with their ideas because there would be no others. The exotic
deportation sites that Hitler imagined for the Jews, Madagascar and
Siberia, would never fall under German power. Much of Europe, however,
would. Not so very long after Hitler published his ideas about daily bread
and the commandment of self-preservation, Europeans were forcing Jews
to recite the Lord’s Prayer and killing them when they could not. Europe
itself became the anti-garden, a landscape of trenches.
During a death march, Miklós Radnóti wrote a poem, meant to be
discovered in his clothing when his remains were excavated from a death

pit: “I the root was once the flower / under these dim tons my bower /
comes the shearing of the thread / deathsaw wailing overhead.”

2
Berlin, Warsaw, Moscow

A worldview is not a plan for taking power. The Judeobolshevik myth
supplied an image of the enemy, but not a foreign policy. Lebensraum
was a summons to empire, not a military strategy. The problem for Hitler
the thinker was that German politics, neighboring states, and the
European order could not be abolished by the stroke of a pen. After he
left prison in 1924, Hitler learned some practical lessons, without ever
changing his mind about the theory. As a young veteran of the First
World War, Hitler could imagine that a dramatic gesture, a coup attempt
in Munich in 1923, would suffice to transform Germany. In this he was
wrong. He was defeated, and his comrade Scheubner-Richter was killed,
by the forces of the state. Yet Hitler did come to power, a much cannier
politician, ten years after his failed putsch. Then he and his party
comrades, with considerable popular support, transformed the German
state. Hitler could imagine that the Soviet Union was a cowardly Jewish
coven. In this he was mistaken. Yet he did manage, eight years after
winning power in Germany, to make war on Moscow and begin a Final
Solution.
For Hitler’s worldview to change the world, he had to become a new
type of politician, practicing a new type of politics. For anarchy in theory
to become extermination in practice, the German state had to be
refashioned, and neighboring states had to be destroyed. For the Jews of
Europe to be murdered, the states destroyed had to be the ones where
Jews were citizens. The vast majority of European Jews lived beyond
Germany, the largest number of them in Poland. Poland was not only the
major homeland of the Jews, but also the country that separated
Germany from the Soviet Union. In one way or another, Poland had to

figure in Hitler’s plans to destroy the Jews and the Soviet state.
In the six years after Hitler came to power, he succeeded in altering the
German state, but failed to recruit a Polish partner for his wars. Had
Poland and Germany fought as allies against the Soviet Union in 1939,
the result would no doubt have been disastrous for the Jews of Europe.
The Holocaust as we know it, however, followed instead a German-Soviet
war against Poland. That the Second World War began as and when it did
—as a campaign of state destruction and national extermination against
Poland in September 1939—was a result of Hitler’s success at home, his
failure to sway Poland to his dream of foreign conquest, and the
willingness of the Soviet leadership to join in a war of aggression.
—
At first glance, a German-Polish alliance would seem more plausible than
a German-Soviet alliance. The Nazis and the Soviets spent the second half
of the 1930s in a vituperative contest of propaganda, each presenting the
other as the ultimate evil. Warsaw and Berlin seemed, by contrast, to
have much in common. From 1935 to 1938, both Germany and Poland
were central European states pressing territorial claims on their
neighbors while boasting a grand rhetoric of global transformation.
Leaders in both Berlin and Warsaw faulted the world order for
constraining flows of food, raw materials, and human beings. Both placed
the Jewish question at the center of their diplomatic rhetoric, suggesting
that its resolution in Europe was a matter of international justice. Both
emphasized the threat of Soviet communism.
Often the German decision to attack Poland in 1939 is explained in the
terms provided by Hitler and his propagandists: by Berlin’s campaign for
adjustments to the border, or by Warsaw’s resistance to them. This had
almost nothing to do with it. In fact, the war between Germany and
Poland resulted from deep differences on the Jewish and Soviet questions
that were shrouded for years by Polish diplomacy. Hitler was willing to
treat Warsaw as an ally in his grander campaigns against Moscow and
against Jews, and also willing to destroy it entirely when such an alliance
came to seem implausible, as it did in early 1939. Either way, Hitler saw
Poland only as an element in his own master plan: as a helper in his
grand eastern war, or as a territory from which that war could be

launched. Hitler gave much more thought to the first variant than to the
second, which was an improvisation that followed rapidly upon the
surprising failure of German-Polish diplomacy in early 1939. All the
while, Poland was an actor with its own aims and purposes. Germany and
Poland ended up thwarting each other because German and Polish
foreign policy were built upon a very different analysis of global politics
and the role of the state.
Berlin’s global position after Hitler’s rise to power might be
characterized as recolonial. Empires as such were just and good; the best
empires were racial; Britain and America were rival exemplars of racial
mastery; a German empire would restore balance to the world. The globe
was naturally a world of competing empires; what was unnatural was the
existence of a Jewish empire—the Soviet Union—and Jewish influence in
London, Washington, Paris, and elsewhere. Germany would make a
redeemingly racial empire by displacing a decadent Jewish dominion. In
Hitler’s mind, Poland’s place in such a recolonial project was to help
Germany: during the war as an ally or benign neutral, afterward as a
satellite or puppet. In this conception no violent changes in the GermanPolish border were needed, since Poland could grant territory to
Germany in exchange for some of the booty in their joint conquest of the
USSR. In the end this would be meaningless since Poland would fall
under the thrall of Germany during the war itself.
Warsaw’s global attitude, by contrast, might be called decolonial.
Poland’s history was one of destruction of an ancient Polish-Lithuanian
Commonwealth by surrounding empires in 1795 and the creation of a
nation-state in 1918. As Poles saw matters, empires had no special
legitimacy, and as a matter of historical logic and justice were giving way
to nation-states. Empires might be destroyed, as the Nazis thought; but if
so, they would be replaced by nation-states rather than racial regimes. All
nations were more or less equal actors in history, striving towards
freedom. Most leading Polish politicians were attached to the nation-state
as an intrinsic value and a collective achievement of the recent past. The
unglamorous conservative definition of the state, the monopolist of
violence and the enforcer of laws, was for many Poles a precious and
unlikely achievement. No Polish leader, despite a grandiosity of rhetoric
about foreign policy, imagined that Poland would displace one of the
world powers. Unlike Hitler and some of the Nazis, the Polish leadership

had no theory about the secret leadership of the USSR or all empires by
Jews, and no illusions about the hidden fragility of the great powers. The
imperial system, of which the USSR was a more or less normal part,
would eventually give way to national liberation. In the meantime,
maritime empires such as Britain and France had to open themselves to
the resettlement of millions of Polish Jews. Warsaw hoped that Polish
Jews would rebel against empires and form Polish-Jewish states that
would somehow extend Polish influence in any site of settlement—least
implausibly Palestine. Israel was as far as Warsaw’s dreaming went.
Both Berlin and Warsaw supported the removal of millions of Jews
from Europe. For Hitler, this was part of a vast project of ecological
restoration, in which the elimination of Jews after a German victory
would repair the planet. The German state was a means to an end; it
could and would be mutated and then put at risk. Antisemitism likely had
more popular resonance in Poland than in Germany, at least before 1933,
but no one with ideas similar to Hitler’s came close to achieving power in
Warsaw. Whereas German policy involved the destruction of states where
Jews lived, Polish policy sought the creation of a state for the Jews. The
covert essence of German foreign policy in the late 1930s was the
ambition to build a vast racial empire in eastern Europe; the covert
essence of Polish foreign policy was to create a State of Israel in Palestine
from the territories granted by a League of Nations mandate to the
British Empire.
The Nazi recolonial and the Polish decolonial mindsets were each, in
their different ways, quite radical. Each was a challenge to the imperial
order as it stood, the first envisioning its refoundation on the racial
principle, the second its inevitable replacement by postcolonial states.
The foreign policies they generated could seem rather similar, especially
to a Führer in Berlin who thought that he needed allies. At a crucial level
of political theory, however, the opposition could hardly have been more
basic: rejection versus endorsement of the traditional state.
This fundamental difference in attitudes about the state arose in large
measure from opposing experiences and interpretations of the First
World War. It was a basic cause of the Second. For Polish patriots, 1918
was a year of miracles, when an independent Polish state, absent from the
maps of Europe for more than a century, arose again. For Germans, 1918
was a year of the unimaginable military defeat, followed in 1919 by the

Treaty of Versailles and humiliating territorial concessions—largely to the
new Poland.
—
After the failure of his coup, Hitler learned to be politic, using the energy
of German resentment to further his own extraordinary ambitions. He
exploited the broad German consensus in favor of revising the European
political order, even though his own goal was to destroy it. He presented
himself as a determined advocate of national self-determination, even
though he did not actually believe in national rights. Likewise, he learned
to soften his presentation of the Jewish menace. He no longer said in
public that Christianity was as Jewish as Bolshevism. German Christians
would be allowed to modify their doctrine rather than be forced to
abandon it, as they were drawn into the larger struggle that would drain it
of all meaning. To Hitler, his fellow Germans were of interest only insofar
as they could be rallied to join a mindless war for future racial prosperity.
In other words, Germans were disappointingly frivolous as they pursued
their petty preoccupations of the Weimar Republic of the 1920s. Hitler
could hardly tell them that, and he did not.
After his release from prison, Hitler still sounded radical by
comparison with the ruling German social democrats or traditional
conservatives, but now his radicalism was in dialogue with political rivals
and meant to attract German voters. Success came in the early 1930s,
when the world economy was in depression, and capitalism and
communism alike seemed to have failed. This left an opening for National
Socialists to present capitalism and communism as mad and doomed
alternatives and themselves as rescuers rather than as revolutionaries.
Hitler did not emphasize at this time, as he had in My Struggle, that only
the extermination of Jews could preserve Germans and the world from
the two supposedly Jewish systems. In his election campaigns of 1932
and 1933, Hitler instead presented his own National Socialism as a recipe
for stability and common sense to be contrasted to the insanity of
capitalist and communist ideology.
In reality, National Socialism involved the aspiration to destroy
communism in order to build a massive empire that would insulate
Germany from the vicissitudes of global capitalism; there was nothing

remotely conservative about that aim. Hitler presented his anticommunism not as a military crusade against a great power, but as
concern for the bottom line of German businesses and the full bellies of
the electorate. In spring 1933, as the Soviet introduction of collective
agriculture starved millions of peasants, Hitler used the specter of hunger
to discourage Germans from voting for the Left. When he spoke at the
Berlin Sportpalast of “millions of people being starved,” he was appealing
to the middle classes and their fears. When he continued by saying that
Soviet Ukraine “could be a grain silo for the entire world,” he was
speaking to his Nazi followers. He veiled one sense of Lebensraum, the
bloody conquest of habitat, behind the other, the promise of physical
comfort.

In 1933, Hitler emerged triumphant from democratic elections during
a long German constitutional crisis that had already centralized power in
the office of the chancellor. His National Socialist party, which had won
only twelve seats in parliament in 1928, claimed a staggering 230 in July
1932, falling to 196 in November 1932. Hitler was named chancellor of a
coalition government in January 1933, supported by conservatives and
nationalists who believed that they could control him. This was an error.
Hitler used the arson of the parliament building in February to limit the
rights of German citizens and create a permanent state of exception that
permitted him to rule without parliamentary oversight.
In the weeks and months of Hitler’s consolidation of power in spring
1933, his followers carried out pogroms and organized a boycott of
Jewish-owned businesses. The fifty thousand or so Polish Jews in
Germany were not subject to these repressions; their Polish citizenship
protected them, as it would for the next five years, from Nazi oppression.
This was all the more notable in that Polish Jews in Poland organized a

counterboycott, refusing to trade with Germany. The boycotts and
beatings of German Jews were barbarous in appearance, again by
comparison with what had come before. But they were a weak foretaste of
the political Armageddon that Hitler had in mind. He would need a war,
and a special kind of war. For that he needed not just power in Germany,
but also a reconfiguration of German power.
After Hitler’s rise in 1933, he pursued domestic policy for more than six
years before he began his first war. This is a long time without armed
struggle for a man whose theory urgently demanded blood sacrifice for
the restoration of nature. Hitler had learned tactics and even a certain
kind of tact after the failure of his 1923 coup, but his electoral gambits did
not qualify as a program. Disguising one’s own ultimate aims to gain
power is not the same thing as making daily decisions once power has
been won. Hitler was no believer in institutions and could hardly have
been satisfied simply by turning German administrative organs to his
own purposes. He was not even a German nationalist. In his view,
Germans were presumptively superior to all others, but the hierarchy was
to be established in practice, by racial war. He would need special
measures to direct Germans towards that war, and unusual techniques to
direct their state to the purposes of generating anarchy.
These were mammoth tasks; his tactics were equal to them.
—
An initial inspiration, according to Hitler himself, was the Balkan Model.
Like a number of other politicians of his era, he saw in the Balkan nationstates that had emerged from the declining Ottoman Empire in the
nineteenth century the proper relationship between domestic and foreign
policies. Serbia and the other Balkan states had shown how to achieve “a
specific foreign policy goal” through “military conflicts.” Balkan-style
militarism featured a specific political economy. The leaders of nationstates with limited internal markets and primarily agricultural exports
wanted larger economies. The justification for extending the national
territory was the liberation of fellow nationals abandoned on the wrong
side of the border. At home, voters were told that war was liberation; in
fact, expansion broadened the tax base. The only purpose of domestic
politics, Hitler claimed, was to mobilize the energy and resources

necessary for achieving living space abroad.
Hitler was, to a point, a Balkan-style militarist. The case he made at
home and abroad for the need to expand the military was the classic
Balkan one of self-determination. Domestic politics thus became the art
of accumulating resources and manipulating opinion such that war
became possible and seemed inevitable. Although Hitler did not seem to
personally care very much about the plight of Germans abroad, he
recognized that nationalism of this kind could mobilize German emotion.
Hitler built up the German armed forces beyond all previous limits and
apparently beyond reason. Compulsory military service was reintroduced
in 1935, and military budgets grew extraordinarily from year to year. In
creating his war machine, Hitler accumulated debt that could be covered
only by war, a condition that itself became an argument for the initiation
of one. The old dilemma of budget priorities—guns or butter—could be
solved in traditional Balkan style: butter through guns. As Hitler put it,
“from the distress of war grows the bread of freedom.”
He respected the Balkan Model but saw it as a first step rather than a
final achievement. Although Hitler needed to control the German state,
its expansion was not really his goal; although he understood the uses of
German nationalism he was not really a nationalist. The national
sentiments of his fellow Germans were what he called a “spaceconquering force” that could propel them into the racial struggle where
they could see and fulfill their higher destiny. Love of country had to be
mobilized to get German men out of the country and into alien realms
that they could master. As one German woman who understood Hitler
would put it, the “inclination towards confined spaces clings like a sticky
mass to the German people and must be overcome.” For the far greater
ambition of Lebensraum, Hitler introduced seven innovations to the
Balkan Model: the party-state, the entrepreneurship of violence, the
export of anarchy, the hybridization of institutions, the production of
statelessness, the globalization of German Jews, and the redefinition of
war.
—
Unlike the Balkan leaders to whom he paid a grudging respect, Hitler was
not a king innovating from established notions of legitimacy and

sovereignty. He was not the dynastic embodiment of a people with duties
or interests, but rather a clear-sighted representative—as he saw matters
—of a race doomed to bloody struggle until eternity. The apostle of nature
had to accommodate traditional institutions to his own vision of the
future, which meant transforming them before he made war. Beginning
from the legal position of chancellor within a faltering republic, inheriting
a host of institutions, Hitler and the Nazis created something new.
The theoretical reconciliation between the old and the new Germany
was the party-state. Such a synthesis had been pioneered by Lenin in the
Soviet Union a decade earlier. The Soviet state was present in every way a
state might be: with an administration, a parliament, a judiciary, a
government, an executive, even a constitution. In fact, the Soviet state
was subordinate to the communist party, which was itself supposed to
represent the workers and their interests. The communist party, in turn,
was run by a central committee, which was run by a politburo of a few
men and indeed usually dominated by a single man. Lenin had the
advantages and disadvantages of revolution; Hitler’s party did not. Thus
the Nazi assimilation of state to party, the Gleichschaltung, took place
gradually.
In 1934, Hitler was officially titled “Führer and Reich Chancellor.” This
vague designation indicated that Hitler was the head of a racial body as
well as the head of government. Hitler was a racial colonialist in theory
and an opponent of the Weimar Republic in practice. In the name of
racial consolidation he destroyed the republic’s basic freedoms and
mocked its constitution. And yet its bureaucrats generally considered
Hitler’s rule as a legitimate continuity of administration.
—
Of course, the very notion of a party-state was self-contradictory. The
Nazi party was founded on the assumption of endless racial conflict,
whereas any traditional state asserts the right to control and limit
violence. Conflict had to be maintained but at the same time channeled.
The existence of the party-state depended, therefore, on Hitler’s second
innovation, the entrepreneurship of violence.
The classic definition of the state, provided by the German sociologist
Max Weber, is the institution that seeks to monopolize legitimate

violence. In the 1920s and the early 1930s, Hitler sought to discredit the
Weimar Republic by demonstrating that it could not, in fact, do this. His
armed guards, known as the SA and SS, functioned before his takeover of
1933 as de-monopolizers of violence. When they beat opponents or
started brawls, they were demonstrating the weakness of the existing
system. Following the example of Benito Mussolini after his rise to power
in Italy, Hitler kept his paramilitaries after he himself had won power.
Often after a revolution the professional miscreants are subordinated to
the state and become servants of order rather than its violators. But the
SA and SS remained party organizations even after the state had been
won. Although their members wore uniforms and had ranks, these did
not indicate a particular place in a state hierarchy. The SA and SS were
organizations of power, but not of a power confined by a conventional
state. Their final authority was the good of the race, as defined by their
Führer. After the takeover of 1933, they became entrepreneurs of
violence, looking for ways and means of murder that would serve the
larger project of racial empire even as the German state came under Nazi
control.
—
Yet this innovation, in its turn, posed a basic problem: How could the
entrepreneurs propagate violence in Germany when what Hitler needed
was a foreign war, and thus the strength within Germany to fight? How
much blood could be shed in the very country that Hitler needed as his
base for his global war in the name of race? If people accustomed to
violence were to be trained in violence, where would that training be put
to use? The rulers of the Soviet Union had earlier faced the same
problems, and solved them elegantly. The conflict required by theory was
to continue, but not on the lands controlled by the theorists. The
communist party was meant to guide the workers through painful class
conflict, but of course after the revolution such a thing could not be
admitted to exist with the Soviet Union itself. The Bolsheviks therefore
maintained that their state was a peaceful homeland of socialism that
provided an example of future harmony for the rest of the world. Soviet
foreign policy worked from the assumption that class conflict beyond the
Soviet Union would eventually bring down world capitalism, and

generate new allies. In the meantime, it was reasonable and legitimate for
Soviet foreign policy to encourage this historical process. In other words,
Soviet authorities monopolized violence within their own country, and
exported the revolution.
Hitler’s third innovation, anarchy for export, was a similar solution to
the conundrum of legitimizing and cultivating violence while preserving
one’s own authority. After 1933, Nazi Germany was chiefly a base for
further operations abroad, which would then transform Germany itself.
German institutions were altered in part to transform Germans, but
mainly to prepare the way for an unprecedented kind of violence beyond
Germany. The revolution would proceed abroad, and when complete it
would redeem Germans and allow them to elevate their own country. The
German state had to be preserved precisely to allow the destruction of
other states, an achievement that would establish the new racial order.
The outlines of this solution emerged in June 1934, a little more than a
year after Hitler seized power, in the defeat of one set of violent
entrepreneurs, the larger and more populist Sturmabteilung (SA), by
another, the more elite bodyguard initially known as the Schutzstaffel
(SS). The SA and its leader Ernst Röhm were faithful to Nazi ideology in
its literal, antipolitical reading. Röhm imagined that his SA men would
become a new kind of army, fomenting revolution inside Germany and
abroad. He spoke of a second revolution to follow Hitler’s takeover of
1933. Hitler, by contrast, understood that a period of political
transformation in Germany would have to precede the completion of the
revolution by foreign war. In the Night of the Long Knives, the SS
arrested and executed Röhm and other leaders of the SA, while
propaganda denounced the victims as homosexuals. As so often in Nazi
actions, the apparent conservatism was a cover for something truly
radical. The legal theorist Carl Schmitt explained that Hitler was
protecting the one true law, that of the race, by asserting himself against
law as conventionally understood. By suppressing the SA, Hitler was able
to appease the commanders of the German armed forces, who had seen
the SA as a threat.
Whereas the SA had stood for Hitler’s youthful anarchism, the SS
understood the need for a new sort of racial politics, radical but patient.
The SS was not a direct rival to the German army nor a threat to order in
Germany. Its commander Heinrich Himmler followed Hitler in seeing

Germany as a realm of politics where change would come gradually.
Rather than making claims for revolutionary power within Germany,
then, the SS would take part in the destruction of states beyond Germany.
This involved a future division of labor with the army rather than a
present competition. The existence of useful German institutions had to
be squared with the desirability of the law of the jungle; actions taken in
the present in Germany had to prepare the way for the future conflict that
was National Socialism’s essence. The German army would prepare the
way by defeating armies, and then the SS would restore the natural racial
order by destroying states and eliminating human beings.
This mission of deferred supremacy allowed the young men who joined
the SS to reconcile racism with elitism, and careerism with a sense of
destiny. They could believe that they were defending what was best in
Germandom even as the existence of their organization transformed the
German state.
—
After its triumph in the Night of the Long Knives, the SS implemented
Hitler’s fourth innovation, the hybridization of institutions. Crime was
redefined; racial and state organizations were merged; and cadres were
rotated back and forth. In 1935, in a significant reform, Himmler
explicitly redefined the SS and the police apparatus as a single organ of
racial protection. Himmler, who served a racial movement rather than a
traditional state, personally directed both the SS and the German police
from 1936. The investigative service of the SS, known as the
Sicherheitsdienst (SD), proposed a new definition of political crime. It
was not crime against the state; the state had validity only insofar as it
represented the race. Since politics was nothing but biology, political
crime was a crime against the German race. Himmler’s deputy Reinhard
Heydrich, whom Hitler called the “man with the iron heart,” directed the
SD.
In 1937, Himmler established the Higher SS and Police Leaders, a new
top level of authority that would unify the two chains of commands under
a few men chosen by and subordinate to Himmler. These new positions
would become significant in territories beyond Germany during war. The
Higher SS and Police Leaders were constrained by the thicket of police

institutions and laws in Germany itself; later they could develop a new
political order in the East without such encumbrances. In September
1939, Heydrich was placed at the head of a new institution known as the
Reich Security Main Office, which unified his SD (a party and racial
institution) with the Security Police (a state institution). It was Heydrich
who would be charged with creating the Einsatzgruppen (task forces)
that would follow German troops into conquered terrains. The
Einsatzgruppen were also hybrid organizations, mixing SS members and
others. The police forces themselves were hybridized from within, as
police officers were recruited to the SS while SS officers were assigned to
the police. The secret state police (Gestapo), the detectives of the
Criminal Police (Kripo), and even the regular uniformed Order Police
(Orpo) were to become Himmler’s racial warriors.
—
Among the limited responsibilities of the SS in prewar Germany were the
concentration camps, small stateless zones inside Germany itself. This
precedent of statelessness was Hitler’s fifth innovation. Himmler
established the first camp at Dachau in 1933 as a place where the
National Socialist party (as opposed to the German state) could punish
people—extralegally, as party leaders deemed necessary. The political
enemy and the social enemy were the racial enemy, and the camps were
to hold all of these groups. Placing socialists, communists, political
dissidents, homosexuals, criminals, and people presented as “work-shy”
in the camps separated them from the normal protections of the state,
and filtered them from the German national community. Their labor
would help prepare Germany for a war that would destroy other states.
The most important aspect of the camps was the precedent they set.
The concentration camp system within Germany in the 1930s was not
very expansive—German colonial facilities in the 1890s were comparable,
and the contemporary Soviet Gulag was more than a hundred times
larger. German camps were chiefly important as a demonstration that
organs of coercion could be separated by the Führer’s will and barbed
wire from the law and the state. In this sense the concentration camps
were training grounds for the more general SS mission beyond Germany:
the destruction of states by racial institutions. Death rates in whole east

European countries, in places where the SS would destroy the state,
would be much higher than death rates in German concentration camps
in the 1930s.
—
Hitler’s sixth political innovation was the globalization of German Jews.
In reality, Jews were a very small part of the population of Germany,
under one percent. Most Jews were assimilated to German society in
language and culture; indeed, the German high culture of the early
twentieth century, including much of the modernism that remains
celebrated today, was in significant measure a creation of Jews. Most
Germans did not see Jews in their daily life, and were not particularly
good at distinguishing Jews from non-Jews. To make a new racial optic
was to consolidate the German national community, the
Volksgemeinschaft.
After Hitler’s takeover, membership in the German state followed the
rules of membership in the Nazi party. In 1933, Jews were banned from
public service and from serving as lawyers. By the terms of the
Nuremberg Laws of 1935, Jews became second-class citizens. For the
Nazi legal theorist Carl Schmitt, these laws were part of a “constitution of
liberty,” since they embodied the arbitrary distinction between friend and
enemy that would make, in his view, normal politics possible. As of 1938,
Jews could not exercise any commercial, medical, or juridical function in
Germany. The steady disappearance of Jews from public life was meant
to spur Jews to leave Germany and to revise the worldviews of Germans.
In everyday life, measures directed against Jews forced Germans to think
about Jews, to notice Jews, and to define themselves as “Aryans,” as
members of a group that excluded the Jews with whom they shared the
country.
At the same time, Nazi propaganda aggressively included German Jews
in an imaginary group, the international Jewish conspiracy. Often Jews
were described not as individuals, but as members of Weltjudentum,
world Jewry. When books were burned, the message was global: In
Heidelberg those of “Jewish, Marxist, and similar origins” were put to the
torch; in Göttingen books were set alight along with a sign bearing the
name “Lenin,” the founder of the Soviet state. In this way the Jew became

the Bolshevik, the union consummated by the very act of burning. Not so
very much later it would be not books but Jews themselves who would be
burned bearing such signs.
The globalization of the German Jew in the 1930s was an important but
limited achievement. The Jew, as Hitler saw matters, remained inside the
German. The extraction of the Jew from the German could be achieved
only by removing Jews from the planet, something that could not yet be
articulated in any precise way. Experience would later show that for Jews
to be killed, they would first have to be physically removed from
Germany. With a few hundred exceptions, Germans would not kill
German Jews on the territory of their common prewar homeland.
Germans beyond Germany, invading and occupying neighboring
countries, and meeting Jews in places where political authority had been
removed and the Jews had no protection, often described them in the
impersonal way prescribed by propaganda. Jews beyond Germany were
the overwhelming majority of the victims of the Holocaust. The
globalization of racism succeeded when combined with world war.
Hitler’s final innovation was the redefinition of war. His version of
militarism went beyond preparation for conventional wars, as in the
Balkans. He intended not just to take territory that might be portrayed as
ethnically contiguous, as in the Balkan Model, but to destroy entire states
and master entire races. “Our border,” as the SS slogan went, “is blood.”
In 1938, Hitler did away with the position of minister of war, and took
personal command of the armed forces. Himmler, Göring, Heydrich, and
the other Nazi leaders planned a war of extermination, starvation, and
colonization in eastern Europe.
Oddly, this planning was not directed against Germany’s actual eastern
neighbor. Poland was unimportant in Hitler’s writings of the 1920s and
visible only as a desired ally in his policies after the seizure of power in
1933. This seems stranger still in light of the fact that Poland is where the
Jews of Europe chiefly lived. About ten times as many Jews were citizens
of Poland as were citizens of Germany. There were about as many Jews in
individual Polish cities such as Warsaw and Łódź as there were Jewish
citizens of Germany. And of course Poland was the country that lay
between Germany and the Soviet Union, where Hitler’s true revolution
was to be made.

A war was always the object of Hitler’s policy. The fact that one took
place was above all a result of his designs and achievements within
Germany. Yet Hitler made a mistake about Poland, imagining it only as
an instrument in a larger German enterprise. Instead, Poland behaved as
a political agent, a sovereign state.
—
The German calamity of 1918 was a Polish miracle. Virtually everything
about the outcome of the First World War that was threatening for
Germans was exhilarating for Poles. The Treaty of Versailles of 1919, a
symbol of injustice in Germany, was a pillar of the legal order in which an
independent Poland could exist. When German troops withdrew from the
East, a new Polish army could fill the power vacuum. Poles fought the
Red Army for the lands that had been German client states. Poland won
the Polish-Bolshevik War, and the Treaty of Riga of 1921 established
Poland’s eastern border with the Soviet Union.
Poland was a new state drawing together territories from three former
empires: Russian, Habsburg, and German. Jews were present in large
numbers in almost the entire country, so interaction with them was a part
of daily life for the other citizens of Poland. Jews were most of the
doctors, lawyers, and traders, and so mediated in contacts with the
broader worlds of knowledge, power, and money. Jews paid more than a
third of the taxes in Poland, and firms owned by Jews were responsible
for about half of the foreign trade. There were about as many assimilated
Jews in Poland as there were in Germany; the difference was that for
every assimilated Polish Jew there were ten more who spoke Yiddish and
were religiously observant in one traditional form or another. Jews in
Poland had parallel systems of schooling, a parallel press, and a parallel
party system.

The question of loyalty to the Polish state was not resolved simply by
answers to census questions about language or religion. It is to yield to
ethnic nationalism to imagine that all people who spoke only Polish
identified with the Polish state and that people of other backgrounds
necessarily did not. Not everyone who spoke Polish was loyal to the new
state or even identified with it. Most Poles were peasants, and most
peasants awaited some gesture from the state that would arouse their
loyalty. The Polish countryside was massively overpopulated, and rural
unemployment was staggeringly high. Land reform was halting and
insufficient. Rather than redistributing land from the large estates, the
Polish state acted as a broker in negotiations for purchases and a source
of credit for purchases. Peasants were dissatisfied by slow transactions,
and hurt when credits were withdrawn during the Depression. Most
peasants wanted both their own plot of land and their traditional rights to
shared use of common land, desires that were contradictory in ideology
but understandable in practice. When all land was treated as private
property with defined owners, ancient rights to the use of pastures and

forests could not be enforced. Polish peasants had been immigrating to
America in large numbers for half a century, but in the 1920s and 1930s
new American laws held them back. Independent Poland assimilated and
integrated large numbers of peasants, but had to deal with considerable
dissatisfaction in the countryside.
Polish patriotism spread outward from the intelligentsia, a large social
group mostly composed of the children of noble landholders and of the
rising middle classes, including the children of prosperous Jews. Polish
political society was divided into two major orientations with opposing
ideas about the design and purposes of the new polity. The most popular
movement among Poles was known as National Democracy and led by
Roman Dmowski. It favored land reform but only insofar as this helped
Poles rather than Ukrainians and Belarusians, who were in some eastern
regions of Poland more numerous and just as poor or poorer. The second
major formation, descending from the Polish Socialist Party of Józef
Piłsudski, supported land reform in principle, but in power yielded to the
voices of the noble landholders it came to see as bastions of the state.
The differences between the two movements on the national and
Jewish questions were fundamental. The National Democrats began from
the idea that Polish traditions of toleration had doomed the old PolishLithuanian Commonwealth in the eighteenth century, and that only
ethnic Poles could be trusted. National Democrats tended to emphasize
the need to create a nation from Polish-speaking peasants, to regard
Ukrainians and other Slavs (perhaps a quarter of the population) as
possibly assimilable, but to see Jews (about a tenth of the population) as
foreigners. Although the movement was founded by secular nonbelievers
influenced by a Social Darwinist conception of life as struggle, with time
it assimilated traditional religious antisemitic ideas, such as the
responsibility of Jews for the death of Jesus. Like the Roman Catholic
Church, National Democrats tended to associate Jews with Bolshevism.
The significant presence of Jews in Poland made antisemitism more
politically salient there than in Germany, but it also made it more difficult
for antisemites such as Dmowski to present Jews in an entirely uniform,
stereotyped way. Although conspiratorial thinking and the
Judeobolshevik conception were certainly present in religious and secular
propaganda, Polish antisemites tended to think of Jews as a Polish rather
than a planetary problem.

Dmowski’s opponent, Józef Piłsudski, began his conception of politics
from the state rather than from the nation. He tended to value the
traditions of the old Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, and to believe
that its legacy of toleration was still applicable. He saw individuals as
citizens of the state, with reciprocal obligations. He began as a socialist
revolutionary, and even as he moved away from his youthful ideals he
maintained the conviction that revolutionary violence was justified.
Though his supporters were probably less numerous than Dmowski’s, he
usually had the tactical advantage of the initiative. Whereas Dmowski
tended to think that the Polish nation had to be raised from its peasant
roots before statehood could be achieved, Piłsudski was ready to rally the
forces that were available at any given time.
Piłsudski’s moment was the First World War. He had prepared for a
European crisis by organizing Legions within the Habsburg monarchy.
The idea was to fight alongside the regular Habsburg forces as long as
that seemed to promise political gains for Poles within the multinational
empire, and then use the military training for other purposes if and when
it seemed warranted. While empires collapsed he also organized a secret
Polish Military Organization tasked with winning independence and
favorable borders. Piłsudski was able to take power in Warsaw and even
lead a victorious war against Lenin’s revolutionary state in 1919–1920.
What he could not do was persuade a majority of Poles to accept his
version of the state. An old socialist comrade, Gabriel Narutowicz, was
elected Poland’s first president and then was promptly assassinated by a
nationalist fanatic. Piłsudski then withdrew from the politics of the state
he had done much to create.
When Piłsudski returned to power, in 1926, it was by coup d’état
against both the National Democratic Right and its dominance in Polish
society, and against the threat of a communist Left which, he thought, the
National Democrats only aided with their chauvinism. Rather than
altering the constitution of the Polish republic, he manipulated its
institutions, finding ways to generate pliable majorities in parliament. He
formed an electoral entity, the Non-Party Bloc for Cooperation with the
Government, which was supported by the national minorities, including
traditional Jews. The orthodox Jewish party Agudat Yisrael became a
bastion of support of his regime. Synagogues adopted resolutions to vote
for Piłsudski’s Bloc, and rabbis led their followers to the urns. Some of

the people who ran the Bloc were secular Jews and Ukrainians.
Piłsudski brought a fake democracy combined with a pinch of renewed
liberalism. His maintenance of the appearance of democratic procedures
after 1926 was meant to preserve a sense of legitimacy while keeping the
National Democrats from winning power. His authoritarian regime
perhaps held off the worst. The years between Piłsudski’s coup and his
death saw world economic collapse, the rise of the Far Right across
Europe, Hitler’s seizure of power and the beginning of the
Gleichschaltung, and Joseph Stalin’s consolidation of power and the
famines of Soviet collectivization. Piłsudski treated the state, in what was
becoming an old-fashioned way, as the equal preserve of all citizens. His
governments removed all legal discriminations against Jews, and created
a legal basis for the local Jewish communes responsible for religious and
cultural affairs.
Piłsudski’s fundamental respect for the state, as opposed to Hitler’s
basic disdain for it, was visible in the fate of the organizations that
Piłsudski had used to seize power. Just as Hitler had his SA and his SS,
Piłsudski had his Legions and his Polish Military Organization. But the
men and women who served in these Polish paramilitary formations were
integrated into conventional state institutions, either after the war or
when Piłsudski returned to power in 1926. Most of the men and women
Piłsudski trusted in power had served in the Legions or the Polish
Military Organization. They were sometimes involved in conspiracies of
Piłsudski’s making, but formed no alternative structure based in
aspirations to zoological anarchy or the supposed superiority of their race
(some of them, in any event, were Jewish). Veterans of the organizations
certainly indulged in the romantic myth of Piłsudski as the savior of the
nation, and in the general cult of secular messianism that was the
spiritual element of his sort of patriotism. The essential idea was that
Poles suffered on this earth so that Poles and others might be liberated—
also on this earth.
With time, these ideas became nostalgic rather than energizing, as the
Polish independence won in 1918 came under increasing threat from both
east and west. By 1933, when Hitler came to power, Piłsudski’s old
comrades in arms—now diplomats, spies, and soldiers—were preoccupied
with the state mainly as an achievement that had to be preserved from
both Berlin and Moscow.

—
Józef Piłsudski was an enemy of the Soviet Union. He had beaten the Red
Army on the battlefield in the Polish-Bolshevik War, and he regarded
Stalin as a bandit. His feelings about the USSR, unlike Hitler’s, were
shaped by personal knowledge of the Russian Empire. Hitler, who
exhibited strong convictions about Russian history and racial character,
did not know the Russian language and never visited the Russian Empire
or the USSR. Piłsudski was born a Russian imperial subject, and had
learned to curse in Russian during five years of political exile in Irkutsk—
a habit he retained to the end of his life. Piłsudski had been across the
Ural Mountains, which for Hitler were as mythical as the Hyperboreans;
Piłsudski had been deported to Siberia, where Hitler dreamed of
deporting Jews.
For Piłsudski neither Russia nor the Left was an abstraction. As a
student in Kharkiv in 1886, he moved with the Russian revolutionary
populists of Narodnaia Volia, the movement that would inspire the
Bolsheviks of the next generation. A year later his older brother plotted
with Lenin’s older brother in a conspiracy to assassinate the tsar.
Piłsudski was accused of involvement as well, and sentenced to five years
of Siberian exile. Upon his return he helped to establish the illegal Polish
Socialist Party and edited its newspaper, The Worker. He was a Russian
revolutionary, in that he and his comrades operated in an illegal
underground along with Russians, Jews, and socialists of all possible
origins in the Russian Empire.
Piłsudski was perfectly aware that there were Jews on the Left: Jews in
the Russian socialist movement who opposed Polish independence; Jews
who wanted Jewish autonomy with whom he cooperated; Jews in his own
Polish Socialist Party. Jews were among the comrades and friends of his
political youth and, in some measure, his political maturity. He knew the
Polish Jews and other Poles who took part in the Bolshevik Revolution.
These were, for him, individuals with names and pasts who had made a
terrible mistake. He himself believed that statehood had to precede
socialism. During and after the First World War he plotted with and
fought alongside numerous Jewish members of his Legions and Polish
Military Organization. In his circles the Judeobolshevik idea was known

to be a folly. The Soviet Union was an actual foreign threat, whereas the
Jewish question was a matter of domestic politics.
Piłsudski and his comrades tended to see empires as incubators of
nations, and progress as national liberation. As people who had
themselves built an independent nation-state from territories of the
defunct Russian Empire, they tended to believe that the same process
could be repeated within the Soviet Union. The major national question,
to their minds, was Ukraine. Whereas Hitler and the Nazis tended to see
Ukraine as a zone for settler colonization, Piłsudski and his comrades saw
it as a neighboring country and a possible political asset. Indeed, for
many Polish leaders Ukraine was home. Piłsudski was from Lithuania,
but he studied in eastern Ukraine. Many of Piłsudski’s lieutenants were
Poles from Ukraine, and much of the 1919–1920 war with the Bolsheviks
had been fought there. Thousands of Poles from Ukraine had been killed
in battle there, as had thousands of Poles who were not. Poles from
Ukraine regarded the country sometimes sentimentally and often
condescendingly, but always as a place inhabited by human beings.
Unlike the Nazis, no Polish statesman could see Ukraine as a blank slate
or as a land without people.
After Piłsudski’s return to power in 1926, some of his old comrades in
the foreign ministry and in military intelligence began a project known as
Prometheanism. Named after the titan of Greek mythology who blessed
humanity with light and cursed humanity with hope, this policy involved
the support of oppressed nations against empires, and in particular the
support of the Ukrainian cause in the Soviet Union. The USSR had been
established as a union of formally national republics. Soviet leaders
imagined that new non-Russian and non-Jewish elites could be recruited
through an acknowledgment of the existence of the other nationalities
combined with affirmative action. Their optimism was grounded in a
Marxist faith about the future triumph of the working class and the
socialism it would bring. The Polish Prometheans, working from a
different scheme of history, saw the Soviet nations rather than social
classes as the historical actors that, with proper support, might weaken
the Soviet Union. Prometheanism was the hidden part of Polish foreign
policy, funded from secret budgets and carried out by trusted men and
women. Its centerpiece was Poland’s most Ukrainian province, Volhynia,
where for several years a Ukrainian culture was officially supported in

order to attract the attention and sympathy of Ukrainians within the
Soviet Union.

Naturally, support of national movements within the Soviet Union, and
the whole Promethean idea, were thought to serve Polish interests. Even
so, many of those who took part in them also believed that they were
continuing a certain ethical tradition, one of sacrifices made by one

nation for the good of all. Their liberal nationalism had been confirmed
rather than challenged by the outcome of the First World War. The
slogan from the romantic patriots of the nineteenth century was “For
your freedom and ours!” All would make sacrifices, and all could triumph
in the end.
—
Piłsudski was right to see the USSR as a solid political edifice and as a
continual threat to Poland, but wrong to view it as a kind of updated
Russian Empire. Hitler grasped its novelty and radicalism, but
mistakenly reduced the ideas and aims of its leaders to Jewish world
domination. Soviet ideologists presented Piłsudski and Hitler together as
“fascists,” which overlooked the very significant differences between an
authoritarian defender of statehood and a warmongering biological
anarchist. But Marxists were right to notice that the private property
regime that prevailed in both Poland and Germany was so different from
the Soviet system as to make communism almost impossible to
understand in both Warsaw and Berlin.
The Soviet, Polish, and German systems can be defined by their
relationship to land. Communists, like capitalists, had to confront the
basic dilemma of maintaining stability in the countryside while satisfying
urban populations. In the Soviet Union in the 1920s, those urban
populations were a largely theoretical working class inhabiting largely
unbuilt cities, to be fed by real peasants who in some places, such as
Ukraine, were very attached to their real plots of land. The Nazis exported
the land question, treating it as a matter of foreign conquest. Polish
governments tried and failed to resolve it in a more or less legal way.
Stalin faced the issue squarely and drew a logical conclusion: The existing
Soviet peasant and countryside could and would give way to a future of
workers and cities. The Poles had no glorious vision of a peasant utopia;
the Nazi agrarian vision of Lebensraum depended upon a foreign
triumph. The Soviets believed that their revolution could be made at
home, the costs borne precisely by the large peasant class—people who
had no place in socialism in any case.
In Moscow, Warsaw, and Berlin, the land question was always
international as well as domestic. If Germany was recolonial, planning to

seize lands from another empire, and Poland was decolonial, hoping to
liberate other empires for the emigration of its citizens, the Soviet Union
was self-colonial. Stalin wished to apply to his own subjects the policies
that he believed imperialists applied to native peoples. Since the Soviet
Union was isolated from the capitalist world and yet needed to match
capitalist development, the only hope was to exploit the resources,
including the people, to be found within Soviet borders. Since the Soviet
Union was the largest country in the world, covering a sixth of its
landmass, such thinking was plausible in Moscow as it was not in Berlin
or Warsaw. The centerpiece of Stalin’s self-colonization was the
collectivization of agriculture that began in earnest in 1930: the seizure of
private farmland and the transformation of some peasants into controlled
agricultural laborers and others into workers in the city or in the camps.
This policy brought massive resistance and then massive starvation:
first in Soviet Kazakhstan, where more than a million people died in a
mad dash to pin nomads to plots of land, which the state then took from
them almost immediately, and then in southern Soviet Russia and the
entirety of Soviet Ukraine, productive territories where peasants lost their
land to the collective. In the second half of 1932, Stalin treated the
starvation in Ukraine as a political problem, blamed the Ukrainians
themselves, and claimed that the whole crisis was a result of Polish
intelligence work. The Soviet leadership that autumn and winter applied
a series of specific policies to Soviet Ukraine that ensured that starvation
deaths were concentrated there rather than elsewhere. About 3.3 million
inhabitants of Soviet Ukraine died horrible and unnecessary deaths of
starvation and disease in 1932 and 1933.
From the beginning of collectivization, thousands of peasants fled
Soviet Ukraine across the Polish border, entire villages at a time, begging
for a war of liberation. One peasant promised that if “a war were to begin
the mood of the people is such that if the Polish army came everyone
would kiss the feet of the Polish soldiers and attack the Bolsheviks.”
Another expressed the hope that “Poland or some other state would come
as quickly as possible to free them from their misery and oppression.”
The summary report of the Polish border guards assigned to interview the
Soviet refugees read as follows: “The population longs for armed
intervention from Europe.”
A deliberate mass starvation in one of the earth’s most fertile regions

could hardly escape notice. But the reactions in Warsaw and Berlin were
quite different. Even as they chronicled starvation, Polish border guards
and intelligence officers reported that Soviet forces assembled along the
borders after the first wave of flights and enforced the starvation
campaign. Contemplating the lethal and unmistakably modern policy of
collectivization, Polish Prometheans began to ask themselves whether
they had, in fact, understood the Soviet Union. Given this new
uncertainty, some began to wonder whether their prior attempts to use
the national question were politically and morally sound. Polish foreign
policy changed course. Poland had agreed in 1931 to a Soviet proposal to
discuss a treaty of nonaggression, and one was signed in July 1932. This
separated Poland from its previous Ukrainian clients and from the
Ukrainian question. This too had its moral hazards.
Polish diplomats in Soviet Ukraine, in evident moral distress, observed
the consequences of collectivization. The consul in Kharkiv, then the
capital of Soviet Ukraine, estimated that five million people had died of
hunger, which was a low estimate for the Soviet Union as a whole and a
slightly high one for Ukraine itself. In February 1933, he reported that
men came to his office to weep about their starving wives and children.
“On the streets” of Kharkiv, another diplomat wrote, “one sees people in
the last throes and corpses.” Hundreds of dead bodies were removed each
night; residents of Kharkiv complained that the militia was not clearing
them quickly enough. Polish intelligence reported, correctly, that the
starvation was even worse in the villages. Peasants were fleeing the
countryside for Kharkiv to beg on the streets. The militia tried to move
them out of sight; the quota for the number of children to be seized each
day was two thousand. Even as the death toll moved from the hundreds
of thousands to the millions, the head of Polish military intelligence
wrote in March 1933 that “we want to be loyal” to the arrangement with
the Soviets, “even though they continually provoke and blackmail us.”
The withdrawal of the Poles from the Ukrainian question could be
experienced by Ukrainians themselves as a betrayal, as indeed it was. The
leading Polish expert on the nationalities question recorded one
consequence of the Soviet-Polish agreement: “The signing of the pact
annulled the hope of rescue from abroad, and so Soviet power in the
conviction of the mass population became the absolute master of life and
death. This was confirmed by the fact of the massive extinction of the

rural population in spring 1933.” The last hope of Ukrainian peasants, as
they themselves said, was a German invasion of the Soviet Union and the
destruction of the Soviet order.
The Polish diplomats, accustomed to seeing nationality and loyalty as
political matters, began to ask themselves how the Germans would
manage Soviet Ukraine if they did invade at some later point. As one
wrote, the Germans “will have to think long and hard about their material
and moral approach to the local population, what the slogans will be and
how they will be realized.” These nuances would have escaped Hitler. He
was planning to invade the Soviet Union and seize Ukraine, but with the
goal of racial colonization rather than of national liberation. He did not
see Ukrainians or Soviet citizens as subjects of politics, or even as full
human beings.
—
The political famine in Soviet Ukraine realigned the foreign relations of
the major regional powers, setting the stage for the Second World War. In
1930, as mass collectivization began, Stalin and the Soviet leadership
were alarmed by the consequences of their own policies and sought peace
talks with Piłsudski to avoid Polish intervention during the
collectivization chaos. The Polish leadership, cutting defense budgets
during the Great Depression and troubled by the moral implications of
intervention, was agreeable. Moscow and Warsaw signed their treaty of
nonaggression in July 1932. Berlin was very sensitive to the possibility
that this pact might be directed against its interests. Piłsudski assigned
his new foreign minister, Józef Beck, appointed in November 1932, to
balance this agreement with a similar accord with Germany. This
initiative was timely. Piłsudski had tried (and failed) to arouse interest in
Europe for a preemptive action against Hitler. Hitler was interested in
rapprochement with Warsaw. In January 1934, Berlin and Warsaw
signed a declaration of nonaggression, agreeing that their common
border would not be changed by force.
For Polish leaders in 1933 and 1934, facing the rise of both Hitler and
Stalin, preserving the status quo was an end in itself. For Berlin the
declaration was a first step towards the grand plan of eastern war and
colonization of Soviet territory. Hitler knew that peace with Poland was

unpopular in Germany, but he did not care: He saw the German-Polish
territorial questions as a springboard to future eastern empire. He
expected that a deal could be reached whereby Poland would voluntarily
concede some territories in exchange for lands gained from the Soviet
Union. In that scenario, traditional German revanchists would get what
they wanted—and be drawn into the war that Hitler wanted. After the
joint declaration, anti-Polish disinformation disappeared from German
newspapers. Joseph Goebbels, Berlin’s master of propaganda, lectured in
Warsaw on the challenging subject of “National Socialist Germany as an
Element of European Peace”; Beck promised to prevent an international
congress of Jewish organizations from meeting in Poland. Piłsudski, now
an old man in faltering health, began to figure in German military
publications as the genius who had shown, back in 1920, how the Red
Army could be beaten in rapid encirclement battles. His memoirs were
published in German with a munificent foreword by the minister of
defense. Hitler wondered aloud about what it would take to draw the
Poles into a full military alliance and told his generals that this was what
he wanted and expected.
Moscow had its own interpretation of the diplomatic realignment
brought about by the Ukrainian catastrophe. Whereas Warsaw saw the
nonaggression agreements with both Moscow and Berlin as proof of a
policy of supporting the status quo, and Berlin saw its engagement with
Warsaw as pointing towards a common campaign against the Soviet
Union, Moscow saw the German-Polish rapprochement as a sign that
Poland and the Soviet Union would never be allies. In the European war
that Stalin expected, Poland would be either hostile or neutral toward the
USSR. This meant that Polish statehood was of no possible value to the
Soviet Union, and should be eliminated when the occasion arose. It then
transpired that the large Polish minority in the western reaches of the
USSR had been hostages to the possibility of some future Soviet-Polish
accord. Once Stalin ceased to believe that Poland could ever be a Soviet
ally, Soviet citizens of Polish nationality became disposable. Poles in the
Soviet Union could be blamed for Soviet policy failures (such as the
famine in Ukraine) and punished accordingly.
In the five years between the signing of the German-Polish declaration
in January 1934 and the clear break in German-Polish relations that
would come in January 1939, Poles in the Soviet Union were subjected to

a campaign of ethnic cleansing. The first wave of deportations of Soviet
Poles from border regions of Soviet Ukraine and Soviet Belarus began a
few weeks after the German-Polish declaration was signed and continued
until 1936. Then Polish communists in the Soviet Union were depicted as
participants in a vast Polish conspiracy to undo the Soviet order. Their
interrogation led to the “discovery” of this “plot,” which then became the
justification for the Polish Operation of 1937 and 1938—the largest and
bloodiest of the Soviet ethnic actions during the Great Terror of those
years. More than a hundred thousand Soviet citizens were shot as
ostensible Polish spies. This was the largest peacetime ethnic shooting
campaign in history.
As the Polish Operation began, Stalin said that he wanted the “Polishespionage slime” to be destroyed “in the interests of the USSR.” When the
chance came to destroy the Polish state itself, he would seize it. Poland
was the home of Europe’s largest Jewish population, more than three
million people. The annihilation of their polity would be crucial to their
fate.

3
The Promise of Palestine

Naturally, there were Polish spies in the Soviet Union in the 1930s, some
of them on a rather unusual assignment. On June 8, 1935, Polish military
intelligence ordered its officers in Soviet Ukraine to make tours of all the
battlefields of the Polish-Bolshevik War of 1919–1920. Their task was not
to prepare some new campaign, but to commemorate a past one. Józef
Piłsudski had died the month before, and a small bag of earth from each
of the battle sites was to be discreetly gathered for his burial mound.
The end of a political life reopened the issue of the character of the
Polish state. Piłsudski’s authority had been personal, and the old
comrades (“the colonels”) who wished to succeed him had to contend
with popular politics at a time of economic depression. Piłsudski’s old
enemies, the National Democrats, chose to exploit popular antisemitism
to mount a challenge to the regime that his associates established after
his death. Their encouragement of pogroms, at the same time an act of
racism and a violation of the law, was understood by both sides as an
attack on the state. The new regime enjoyed greater formal powers than
had Piłsudski himself, since it exploited an authoritarian constitution that
had been conceived while he was still alive. Although most of his
successors were not antisemitic by conviction themselves, they tried to
ride out the challenge from the National Democrats by adopting
antisemitic public policy. In so doing, Piłsudski’s successors
compromised the basic moral premise of his politics: that Poland was a
state and not a race.
In 1935, responsibility for Jewish affairs was transferred from the
ministry of internal affairs to the ministry of foreign affairs. Jews were no
longer normal citizens to be integrated and protected by the state, but

somehow aliens: a matter for the world at large, objects whose future
might be negotiated with foreign officials. Piłsudski’s electoral
organization, which had been popular with Jews, was replaced by a party
of power which excluded them. This new Camp of National Unity (Obóz
Zjednoczenia Narodowego, OZON), created in 1937, announced its
preference for the emigration of about ninety percent of Poland’s Jews.
Such policies, regarded as a loathsome betrayal of tradition and principle
by much of the Polish Center and Left, were meant to prevent the
pogroms organized by nationalists. The leader of OZON had a Jewish
wife, something unthinkable for a Nazi. Nevertheless, by the standards of
previous Polish practice, the change after 1935 was fundamental and
unmistakable.
The man responsible for Jewish policy was Wiktor Tomir Drymmer, a
close collaborator of Polish foreign minister Józef Beck. With a
background in military intelligence, Drymmer was formally in charge of
both personnel and consular affairs in the foreign ministry. He was also
the head of its emigration office, charged with arranging the exit of
citizens. Poland’s official position was that European maritime empires
should either permit Poland access to resources in their overseas colonies
or allow Polish citizens to migrate to such places. This analysis had a
force that went beyond Jewish policy. At a time when rural
unemployment exceeded fifty percent, Warsaw was pushing for the right
of all of its citizens to emigrate. In the case of Jews, Polish diplomats
pointed to the dramatic consequences of frozen migration routes. Before
the First World War, roughly 150,000 Jews left Europe each year; in the
1930s the figure was a small fraction of this. In “trying to find an outlet
for its surplus population” the Polish government had “in mind the Jews
first of all.”
—
The question of the settlement of European Jews was a general European
one, in which Poland occupied a position somewhere between the Nazi
one (Jews must be eliminated, and emigration seemed the practical way
to achieve this) and the Zionist one (Jews had a right to a state, which
would have to be created from an existing colony).
The question of where European Jews might settle had been open since

the nineteenth century, and very different sorts of politicians and
ideologues proposed the same places. The island of Madagascar, a
colonial French possession off the southeast African coast in the Indian
Ocean, was introduced to the discussion by the antisemite Paul de
Lagarde (actually a German named Bötticher) in 1885. This idea could be
considered with greater or lesser hostility or sympathy. It had supporters
in Great Britain and, of course, among Germans, including the Nazi
leadership. Only in French could one say “Madagassez les Juifs,” but not
all of those who considered the idea in France were enemies of the Jews.
Zionists also considered Madagascar, although most rejected it.
Polish authorities also allowed themselves to be tempted by the
prospect of colonizing Madagascar. The idea of settling Madagascar with
Polish citizens was first raised in 1926; at that time the idea was the
emigration of Polish peasants from the overpopulated countryside. A
decade later, after Piłsudski’s death, the idea returned in a Jewish variant.
Beck proposed the emigration of Polish Jews to Madagascar to French
prime minister Léon Blum in October 1936, and Blum allowed the Poles
to send a three-man exploratory delegation to the island. The
representative of the Polish government thought that about fifty
thousand Jews could be settled immediately—a significant number, but
not one that would have affected the population balance in Poland. The
delegate from the Jewish Emigration Association thought that four
hundred families might settle. The agricultural expert from Palestine
thought that even this was too much. The inhabitants of Madagascar
rejected any settlement from Poland. French nationalists, for their part,
were concerned that the Polish colonization project would succeed and
that the island would become Polish. Meanwhile, the pro-Madagascar
propaganda of the Polish regime backfired: When told that the island was
suitable for colonization, Polish nationalists demanded “Madagascar only
for the Poles!”
Beck and Drymmer expressed a special interest in the future of
Palestine, a former Ottoman possession that was under British authority.
The decline and fall of the Ottoman Empire had been a lesson for many
European statesmen. Whereas Hitler tended to see the creation of Balkan
nation-states from the Ottoman Empire as a positive example of
militarism, Poles understood the same history as national liberation that
would spread from Europe to Asia. Whereas European territories taken

from empires after the First World War generally became nation-states,
Asian territories tended to become part of the French or British empires,
sometimes in the form of “mandates” from the League of Nations. These
were places judged not ready for sovereignty, and thus allotted to the
great powers for political tutoring. Palestine, taken from the defunct
Ottoman district of South Syria, was such a mandate. Although the
territory had a rather small Jewish minority when the British took control
in 1920, British policy presented Palestine as a future Jewish National
Home. This was in line with the hopes of Zionists, who hoped that one
day a deal for full statehood could be struck.
Hitler’s Jewish policy forced all of the powers to clarify their position
on the future of Palestine. About 130,000 German Jews emigrated in the
years after Hitler came to power, some fifty thousand of them settling in
Palestine. Their arrival reduced the demographic advantage of local
Arabs, who tended to consider Palestine as part of some larger Arab
homeland. Thinking that a continuation of Jewish immigration could
lead to the success of Zionism, Arab leaders organized political action:
first riots in April 1936, then the formation of strike committees and a
general strike that lasted through October. This meant that 1937 was the
moment of truth for the European states with a declared interest in the
future of Palestine: Great Britain, Nazi Germany, and Poland.

London at first reacted to the Arab disturbances with a proposal for the
partition of Palestine. When this led to further political chaos, the British
restricted Jewish immigration to a quota. As the world was seen from
London, Palestine was only a tiny part of the vast Arab and Muslim
territories of the British Empire. Pleasing Jews over Palestine could mean
alienating Muslims throughout the Near East and southern Asia. Berlin
specified in 1937 its own attitude toward Zionism and a possible State of
Israel. Palestine had appealed to the Nazi regime as a place where Jews
could settle so long as this had no clear political implications for the Near
East. But in spring 1937 the German consul in Jerusalem was concerned
lest the creation of a State of Israel from Palestine weaken Germany’s
position in the world. The German foreign minister circulated the official

position to all embassies and consulates that June: Jewish statehood in
Palestine was to be opposed, as a State of Israel would become a node in
the world Jewish conspiracy.
The Polish position differed from both the British and the German.
London favored Jewish statehood (at some distant and undefined point)
but opposed much further Jewish migration for the time being. Berlin
opposed Jewish statehood, but wanted Jews to leave Germany as soon as
possible for some distant and undefined place. Warsaw wanted both
massive emigration of Jews from Europe and a Jewish state in Palestine.
In public the Polish foreign minister and other diplomats called upon the
British to ease immigration restrictions and create a Jewish National
Home as soon as possible. The Poles had very specific ideas of what such
an entity should be: “A Jewish, independent Palestine, as large as
possible, with access to the Red Sea.” This meant both sides of the River
Jordan; in private, Polish diplomats even raised with British colleagues
the issue of the Sinai Peninsula, in Egypt. In 1937, the Polish armed
forces began to offer arms and training to the Haganah, the main Zionist
self-defense force in Palestine.
—
Zionism was the Jewish political movement, active for half a century,
whose advocates identified the future of the Jewish people with the
settlement of Palestine and the establishment of a state. As a general
matter, Zionists believed that this would be achieved through cooperation
with the British Empire and other great powers. Although its advocates
held a variety of political positions and its factions were many, many
Zionists in the 1930s were left-wing, envisaging agricultural communes
that would transform both the ancient Jewish land and the modern
Jewish people. In Poland, Zionism was the ideology of a whole range of
political parties, from extreme Left through extreme Right. Much to the
dismay of Zionist leaders in London and New York, the direction of the
overall movement was much affected by the politics of Zionism within
Poland.
The world Zionist movement split in September 1935, just as Polish
policy on Jews was revised by Piłsudski’s successors. Vladimir Jabotinsky
emerged then from the General Zionist movement with a program of

Revisionist Zionism. He urged Jews in Europe to consider massive and
rapid emigration while calling for the immediate creation of a State of
Israel in the Mandates of both Palestine and Trans-Jordan. This version
of Zionism spoke to Poland’s new leaders. In June 1936, Jabotinsky
presented his “evacuation plan” to the Polish foreign ministry. He
claimed that Palestine, over time, could absorb eight million Jews. When
his initiative was announced in the Polish press a few weeks later, the
specified goal was the settlement of Palestine on both sides of the River
Jordan by 1.5 million Jews in the course of the following ten years.
Jabotinsky wanted Poland to inherit the Mandate of Palestine from
Great Britain. He even proposed that Poland be given the Mandate of
Syria, which it could then trade for the Mandate of Palestine or use as
leverage against the Arabs generally. This sort of thinking about foreign
policy was very much in the Polish diplomatic tradition: an imaginative
attempt to turn nothing into leverage. Indeed, the easy agreement
between Jabotinsky and Polish leaders was not simply a matter of
common interests. Although Jabotinsky spoke French when he made his
case in Warsaw, he like most Polish leaders was born a Russian imperial
subject and had been educated in the Russian language. The idea of
building a nation-state from empires that partitioned historic national
lands was a common one.
Jabotinsky’s power base by 1936 was Polish. Revisionism was a
movement of youth, based in paramilitary organizations. By far the
largest of these was Betar, the right-wing Jewish youth paramilitary in
Poland, whose members promised to devote their lives “to the revival of
the Jewish state with a Jewish majority on both sides of the Jordan.”
Betar’s model was the Polish Legions of the First World War, which in the
favorable conditions of war among empires had prepared the way for
Polish independence. Like the Poles of the Legions, the Jews of Betar
trained with weapons and awaited the opportune moment of general
conflict. The vast majority of Betar members were products of the Polish
school system, and imbibed its core message of secular messianism (“Our
dream: to die for our people!”). When Betar brawled with Jewish leftist
organizations, its members sang Polish patriotic songs—in Polish.
Uniformed Betar members bearing firearms marched and performed at
Polish public ceremonies alongside Polish scouts and Polish soldiers.
Their weapons training was organized by Polish state institutions and

provided by Polish army officers. Menachem Begin, one of Betar’s
leaders, called upon Betar members to defend the borders of Poland in
the event of war. Betar members wrote in their newspapers of their two
fatherlands, Palestine and Poland. They flew two flags, the Zionist and
the Polish, until the end of their existence in Poland—in the ghetto
uprising of 1943 they raised both banners from Warsaw’s tallest building.
Both Menachem Begin and another promising Betar activist, Yitzhak
Shamir, treasured the Polish Romantic poets of the nineteenth century
and quoted them at Jewish gatherings. The great poet of the new Jewish
Right, Uri Zvi Greenberg, spent the 1930s in Poland. The secular
messianism of Begin and Shamir and the Betar movement bore a strong
resemblance to the Polish version, developed during Poland’s long period
of statelessness in the nineteenth century: sacrifice on this earth for
change on this earth.
—
After Piłsudski’s death in May 1935, Polish spies were not the only ones
sent on long missions to find the symbolically appropriate soil for his
commemoration. Members of Betar brought clumps of earth from their
own sacred site, Tel Hai in Palestine, where their own hero, Joseph
Trumpeldor, had been killed by Arabs. (“Betar” was the site of the last
stand in the Third Roman-Jewish War; the name was later reimagined as
a Hebrew acronym for “Covenant of Joseph Trumpeldor.”) In life, both
Trumpeldor and Piłsudski had been subjects of the Russian Empire; both
struggled to reconcile national and social justice; and both commanded
legions that were meant to cultivate cadres for national armies and
national states. Piłsudski had been victorious in his war of liberation
against the Soviet Union in 1920; Trumpeldor was killed that same year.
So their unity after death was perhaps not so strange. Betar members
attended Piłsudski’s open-air memorial service in large numbers, arriving
in precision formation on motorcycles bearing Polish and Zionist flags.
Jabotinsky spoke of “eternal, indestructible sacrifices on the altar of the
fatherland.” Piłsudski became a central cult figure of both traditions, that
of Polish leaders and Jewish revolutionaries.
Yet disagreement about the meaning of Piłsudski’s legacy was
inevitable. Piłsudski had led a colorful life and had deployed violence in

various settings. Which Piłsudski was the model for the Jewish future?
Was it the Piłsudski of the Legions, nominally loyal to an empire, and
preparing for a war in which that empire would have to make
concessions? This was how Jabotinsky saw matters, and at first his vision
defined that of Betar. As time passed, however, the Piłsudski of the Polish
Military Organization, exploiting terror and propaganda, was ever more
appealing to Jewish rebels. Each of these approaches has a political logic;
each depends upon a judgment of the historical conjuncture. The logic of
legions is that supporting an empire in times of war creates debts to be
repaid in times of peace. The logic of terrorism is that fear can destroy a
weak system and make way for a new one. In the late 1930s, Menachem
Begin mounted a challenge to Jabotinsky, supporting political terrorism
rather than legions. At a Betar congress in Warsaw in September 1938,
Begin openly criticized Jabotinsky’s judgment.
By 1938, the Polish ruling elite was supporting the most radical
available option among the Revisionist Zionists, a conspiratorial National
Military Organization operating in Palestine that favored terrorism to
provoke the conjuncture rather than waiting for it. After the Arab riots
and general strike of 1936, and the British concessions to the Arabs in
1937, members of the Haganah disagreed about the future. Younger,
more right-wing, and more radical individuals left the Haganah to form
the Irgun Tzvai Leumi, or National Military Organization, named and
modeled after the Polish Military Organization, and usually known as
Irgun. The core of the new Irgun were Jews from Poland who had been
members of Betar. Under Begin, the leader of Betar in Poland from
March 1939, the organization was increasingly a front for Irgun.
Irgun liaised with the Polish government through the Polish consul in
Jerusalem, Witold Hulanicki. His general instructions were to present
himself as “the representative of a state that has interests that are similar
to Zionist aspirations and that can contribute to the realization of those
aspirations.” Hulanicki tended to know about Irgun’s actions before they
took place. From his perspective, Irgun was a “very comfortable and very
much needed (by me) political instrument” and Avraham Stern, one of its
leaders, was a Polish agent.
—

Avraham Stern was a child of revolution. He was born in Suwałki in 1907,
in a Jewish-Polish town near the Augustów Forest in the western reaches
of the Russian Empire. Deported as a boy along with his family and
hundreds of thousands of other Jews, he became one of the young Jewish
men radicalized by the Russian imperial collapse. He lived with his family
in Bashkiria for about six years, then saw the great cities of
postrevolutionary Russia and became a communist before returning to
Suwałki in what had meanwhile become independent Poland. Stern came
to revere Piłsudski and his new Polish state much as he had admired
Lenin and his new Soviet state. He immigrated to Palestine in the 1920s,
and began studies at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. He was
regarded by his professors as one of the great hopes of Jewish humanist
studies. But he was without any means of subsistence, and in 1929 he was
going hungry.
Although he was a talented linguist and writer, Stern opted in the
1930s for politics over literature. He traveled in Europe seeking support
for an independent Jewish state, first from Mussolini’s Italy and then in
Piłsudski’s Poland. Although he was an early emigrant from Poland and
thus not a product of Betar, he was very comfortable in Polish culture. He
wrote romantic poems about arousing hearts of stone and raising the
dead—in Polish. As exercises for himself he composed poems
simultaneously in his three revolutionary languages: Russian, Hebrew,
and Polish. In a poem in Hebrew and Polish, he wrote of the tears shed
for his happy childhood, his troubled youth, and his failed manhood.
Stern grew to maturity in the middle of the great east European
revolutionary forces: communist revolution, Polish state building,
Zionism. He was a child of revolution who wanted to be a father of
revolution. “Reality is not what it appears to be,” he wrote, “but what
force of will and longing for a goal make it.”
Hulanicki, the Polish consul in Jerusalem, described Stern to his
superiors in the foreign ministry as the “ideological leader” of the
“extreme elements” of Irgun. In February 1938, Hulanicki wrote to
Drymmer in Warsaw, asking him to meet Stern. The proposal that Stern
brought to Drymmer, with Hulanicki’s support, was that Poland train
instructors for Irgun. The Irgun elites trained by Poland would then
become the officer corps of a future Jewish revolutionary army that
would conquer Palestine. The soldiers would be thousands of trained

Betar fighters brought from Poland. One of the Irgun men imagined
“armed soldiers, entire battalions from many ships, landing
simultaneously at various points along the coast of Eretz Israel.”
Drymmer endorsed the idea. Field training in the southeastern Polish
region of Volhynia (where Betar had been trained by the Polish army for
years) and staff training at Rembertów (a military base just outside of
Warsaw) began within a few months. Volhynia became a staging area for
the clandestine and illegal emigration of revolutionary Jews with military
training to the British Mandate of Palestine. In Volhynia, where more
than two-thirds of Jewish students attended Zionist schools, the regional
governor, Henryk Józewski, was a sympathizer of Revisionist Zionism.
—
The first major encounter between German Jewish policy and Polish
Jewish policy was not in Europe but in Asia. Nazi oppression led to the
immigration of German Jews to Palestine, which led to the Arab riots that
radicalized right-wing Zionism and created a new possibility for Polish
foreign policy: the support of Irgun.
Although Polish leaders were responding to British, German, Arab, and
Jewish actions over which they had little influence, their own policy did
follow something like a consistent line. In a sense, the small group of
Poles who made foreign policy after 1935 were shifting from one form of
Prometheanism to another. The initial Prometheanism, under Piłsudski,
presumed that Warsaw could aid neighboring peoples to the east, above
all Ukrainians, to gain their freedom from the dominion of Moscow. The
emerging variant involved support of the Jewish nation against British
rule in Palestine. As Polish authorities abandoned the anti-Soviet line
that Hitler admired, they shifted to a pro-Zionist conspiracy that the
Nazis would have found incomprehensible—had they known anything
about it.
There was some continuity in personnel from the first to the second
Prometheanism. The Volhynian governor who supported Revisionist
Zionism, Józewski, had been the most important Promethean activist.
His heroes were Piłsudski and Jabotinsky, whom he called “an apostle of
the Jewish world.” His province had been a departure point for Ukrainian
spies in the early 1930s; it became a training ground for Jewish

revolutionaries in the late 1930s. Drymmer, the high official of the foreign
ministry charged with the Jewish question, had been a Polish Military
Organization operative in Ukraine and a Promethean. Tadeusz
Pełczyński, the director of Polish military intelligence who organized the
training courses for Irgun, was also a veteran of the Polish Military
Organization and a Promethean. Witold Hulanicki, the Polish consul in
Jerusalem, was one more product of the Polish Military Organization.
The continuities were ideological as well as personal. For the men in
power in Warsaw, supporting right-wing Jews meant supporting fellow
anti-communists. Revisionist Zionists might one day lead millions of
Polish Jews to Palestine; in the meantime they drew some young Jewish
hotheads away from communism, beat up in brawls the young Jewish
men who did opt for the Far Left, and supported the Polish government
against the Soviet Union. All of these veterans of Polish conspiracy could
see that Jews needed statehood as Poles once did. The younger Jewish
men whom they supported and sometimes befriended were looking
forward to statehood just as the older Poles were looking back
nostalgically to its creation. Jewish Prometheanism was thus a chance for
Poles to relive a youth whose accomplishments now seemed endangered.
As one Polish diplomat explained the endorsement of the Revisionists to
a bemused supporter of mainstream Zionism, “Emotionally, they appeal
to us the most.” From the Ukrainian to the Jewish Prometheanism
extended the basic optimism that the liberation of nations from empires
was a good to be expected from history. Poles preserved the same
fundamental tradition of using the weapons of the weak to oppose
empires and create states. They still embodied a certain elite romanticism
of politics, the belief that deft techniques of state creation were a matter
for the sensitive and courageous few, who would bring along the masses
later, in good time. And they maintained the same preference for secret
measures.
Yet there were some telling differences between the first and the
second Prometheanism, corresponding to the fundamental shift in Polish
Jewish policy in 1935. After 1935, the regime was much more pessimistic
about the possibility for change in the Soviet Union. Poles who had
worked for the Promethean movement either became liberal critics of the
new regime or tacked to the new right-wing version of the idea. The first
Prometheanism saw national minorities in someone else’s country as a

problem for that other country—the major example being Ukrainians in
the Soviet Union. The first Prometheanism had also involved the Muslim
nations of the USSR. Insofar as Prometheans had engaged Jerusalem
before 1935, it was as a center of Islamic national movements. The second
Prometheanism regarded a national minority in Poland as a burden for
Poland. Jews were no longer seen as citizens of a republic, but a national
problem that might be resolved here or there, or perhaps a national force
that might be deployed abroad. Jerusalem was no longer a city of
Muslims today but a city of (Polish) Jews tomorrow. There was no longer
the solidarity expressed by the slogan “For your freedom and ours!” The
slogan of the second Prometheanism might have been: “For our freedom
from you!”
In the first Prometheanism, Poland was to endorse minority rights to
set an example and destabilize neighboring regimes that did not. In the
second Prometheanism, it was legitimate to create conditions under
which Poland’s own citizens would wish to emigrate. The Polish
authoritarian regime after 1935 countenanced the use of economic
pressure to encourage Jews to leave the country. The police stopped
attempts at pogroms but treated boycotts of Jewish businesses as a
legitimate economic choice. The parliament passed a ban on kosher
slaughter, though it was never implemented. Civil society was moving in
the same direction. Professional organizations in which Jews were
prominent had to reregister their members. Most universities did nothing
as Jewish students were beaten and intimidated until they sat in the last
rows of the lecture halls, called “ghetto benches.” Much of the clergy of
the Roman Catholic Church, in Poland as elsewhere in Europe, continued
to explain that Jews were responsible for the evils of modernity in general
and communism in particular.
Unlike the Nazi regime, the Polish government did not present Jews as
the hidden hand responsible for global crises and therefore for all of
Poland’s woes. Jews were portrayed, rather, as human beings whose
presence was economically and politically undesirable. The vision of a
future Poland without most of its Jews was certainly antisemitic, but this
was not an antisemitism that identified Jews with the fundamental
ecological or metaphysical evils of the planet. Unlike in Germany, there
was meaningful opposition. The Polish Socialist Party, the largest
political party in Warsaw, opposed the government line, as did the mayor

of Warsaw. The Jewish political party known as the Bund, committed to
socialism in Europe and to Jews remaining in Poland, did extremely well
in the 1938 local elections. For that matter, the Jewish share in the Polish
economy was greater in 1938 than it had been when the Great Depression
began. The undeniable liveliness of Jewish commerce and politics as the
1930s came to an end made Poland quite different from Germany.
—
Nazi leaders saw in Poland what they wanted to see. A certain amount of
misperception in Berlin was perhaps inevitable. Local Jewish success in
Poland was invisible from Berlin, whereas official Polish restrictions on
Jewish life were reported favorably in the German press. The more
ambitious elements of Polish pro-Zionism were clandestine, whereas the
official antisemitism was open. The Nazi leadership could read the
evidence from Poland as a sign that the friendly German foreign policy
initiated in 1934 had worked and could be extended.
This was a misunderstanding, although one that Polish diplomats,
lacking any better ideas, cultivated for as long as they could. The GermanPolish nonaggression declaration of January 1934 was for Piłsudski and
then for Beck a counterpoint to the July 1932 treaty of nonaggression
with the USSR. For Hitler, it was a platform for recruitment to a future
anti-Soviet crusade. Like most of Hitler’s policies in the 1930s, it was
significant for what it promised about the future. In May 1934, Hitler was
already wondering aloud what sort of commitment Poland would need to
join in an alliance against the Soviet Union. Speaking to the Polish
ambassador Józef Lipski that August, Hitler called Poland Germany’s
“shield in the east.” The following January he pronounced that Germany
and Poland would be compelled to make war together against the USSR.
As Hitler explained to Beck later in 1935, the German-Polish declaration
was to be understood as part of a German grand design.
It quickly became obvious in Warsaw what that design entailed.
Hermann Göring, Hitler’s plenipotentiary on Polish matters, was quite
forthcoming with his Polish interlocutors. On a hunting trip in the
Białowieża Forest with Polish officials in January 1935, Göring unveiled
the grand scheme of a German-Polish invasion of the USSR, with Poland
to get the spoils of Ukraine. Lipski, the Polish ambassador to Berlin,

found this implausible and asked Göring not to repeat such ideas to
Piłsudski when they all returned to Warsaw. Göring did so anyway, but
was ignored; Piłsudski was in any event very ill. Göring made similar
approaches on at least four more occasions after Piłsudski’s death,
sometimes offering land to the Poles from Soviet Ukraine, sometimes
from northern Soviet Russia. No one in Warsaw would ever be persuaded
by any of this, though the barrage of proposals from Göring and others
continued for years.
Göring would later return to Białowieża to hunt—after the war began,
after Poland was destroyed, after the SS cleared the woods of Jews.
—
Cults of personality are open to postmortem interpretation. Piłsudski’s
successors struggled to preserve the status quo by realizing what they saw
as his political testament of 1932–1934: a diplomatic balance between
Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. People who wanted to change
Europe recalled the young Piłsudski: Betar saw the legionary of the First
World War in 1918, Irgun the conspiratorial state builder of the Polish
Military Organization of 1919—and the Nazis the military commander
who had beaten the Red Army in 1920. Hitler saw Piłsudski as the “great
patriot and statesman” who having defeated the Bolsheviks once would
surely have seized the chance to do so again. The Polish leadership,
although happy to dabble in Jewish revolution in Palestine, had a much
more conservative understanding of Piłsudski’s European prescription
for the 1930s. Poland was to keep an equal distance from both mortal
threats, Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union.
The hope was that if Poland could stay neutral between what Piłsudski
had called “totalistic states,” no war could take place. Any war, the Poles
liked to think, would have to involve Poland as an ally of either the
Soviets or the Germans, since any war that involved them would have to
take place on Polish territory. The plan was to stop all wars by refusing to
join in them, to halt two mobile forces by standing still between them.
Although Piłsudski himself understood that this was at best a strategy for
a few years, his successors became attached to the leverage of neutrality
and saw it as a doctrine. This prevented them from recognizing the scale
of Hitler’s ambition and from grasping that Stalin had dismissed the

Polish state and was awaiting an offer from Hitler.
Right after Piłsudski’s death, Göring proposed a common GermanPolish invasion of the Soviet Union, an offer he repeated in February
1936. Throughout that year, Hitler made similar appeals to the Poles. Jan
Szembek, Beck’s number two in the Polish foreign ministry, reported
upon his extensive conversations with Hitler at the Berlin Olympics of
August 1936: “Hitler’s policy to us is dictated by the conviction that
Poland will be his natural ally in future conflicts with the Soviets and
communism.” That November, Germany and Japan initiated the AntiComintern Pact. Though ostensibly a defensive arrangement against
international communism, this rather quickly became the basis for a
military alliance. Berlin asked Warsaw to join the Pact in February 1937,
a full six months before Italy became its third member. Warsaw refused
this proposal then, as it did on at least five occasions thereafter.
This was a trying time for Polish diplomats. Unlike the Germans,
Japanese, and Italians, the Poles had experience with communist power
and a sense of what a conflict with the USSR would mean. Many of the
Poles running the country in the late 1930s had fought the Soviets in
1919–1920 and had lost comrades to the Red Army and to the Soviet
secret state police, back then called the Cheka. Some of them had seen the
tortured bodies of friends and relatives in mass graves; such things were
not forgotten. In 1936, Polish diplomats serving in the Soviet Union
received instructions about how to comport themselves in the event of
arrest by the NKVD, as the Soviet secret state police was by then known.
Beginning in 1937, Polish diplomats were filing or reading reports about
the distressing number of ethnic Poles disappearing from Soviet Ukraine,
Soviet Belarus, and the large cities of Soviet Russia.

General instructions from the Warsaw headquarters of Polish military
intelligence made clear that the disastrous Polish position in the Soviet
Union could not be improved by a German invasion. Poland had no
capacity to intervene on Soviet territory, and a German intervention
would only make matters worse. Poland’s policy of equal distance meant
that its territory was not only Germany’s shield to the east, but the
USSR’s shield to the west. It was a dire situation, whose logic Polish
diplomats, of course, did not explain to their German colleagues. They
tried, as diplomats do, to make the most of what their interlocutors
wanted, without acceding to it. When asked about a German-Polish
alliance against the Soviet Union, they evaded the issue for as long as
possible. When finally forced to issue a categorical response, they
categorically refused.
In summer 1938, Göring was once again trying to tempt the Poles with
the fertile soil of Ukraine. Matters came to a head that October, when
Hitler presented the Poles with a “comprehensive solution” to all of the

problems in German-Polish relations. Such a grand stroke was very much
Hitler’s style, and he could believe that he was offering Poland a more
than reasonable arrangement. The claims he made on Poland’s territory
were mild by comparison with the German mainstream: that Danzig, a
free city on the Baltic coast, be allowed to return to Germany; and that
German authorities be allowed to build an extraterritorial autobahn
across Polish territory between the main body of German territory and its
noncontiguous Prussian districts. These two issues were negotiable, and
indeed were negotiated. The real problem was what Poland would get “in
return.” As German foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop explained
to Ambassador Lipski, the Germans envisioned for the near future “joint
action in colonial matters, the emigration of Jews from Poland, and a
joint policy to Russia on the basis of the Anti-Comintern Pact.”
Ribbentrop made much of the gains of Ukrainian territory that Poland
would supposedly win in the conquered Soviet Union. This fell on deaf
ears. The decision against intervening in the Soviet Union had been made
in Warsaw in 1933. Polish leaders had ceased to believe that Ukraine
could be transformed easily by outside actors. They calculated that the
Germans might take Moscow with Polish help, but did not see how a
political victory could follow. They were keenly aware that a joint
German-Polish invasion of the USSR would involve massive German
troop movements around or through Poland, and anticipated that any
such war would leave Poland a German satellite.
The side talk between German and Polish leaders during the critical
weeks of late 1938 was about the Jewish question. Hitler had explained to
Lipski in September that he anticipated a common anti-Jewish action by
Germany, Poland, and Romania. In November, Hitler praised Polish
authorities for undertaking the vital struggle against the Jews. At the time
of his proposal of a “comprehensive solution” and in subsequent
discussions with Polish diplomats, Hitler stressed the positive connection
between an anti-Soviet alliance and the removal of the Jews from Europe,
in the first instance from Poland and Romania. In his mind, the
destruction of the Soviet Union was part of a larger campaign against the
planetary Jewish threat. His Polish interlocutors did not follow this chain
of reasoning.
In these negotiations the Germans and Poles seemed to be discussing
the same desired outcome: an emigration of millions of European Jews to

Madagascar. Although the two sides were apparently referring to the
same island and the same action, something very different was meant.
The Germans were perfectly correct that the Polish leadership feared the
Soviet Union and wanted to be rid of most Polish Jews. The Poles saw
these as distinct problems, where the attempt to solve one might create
problems for the other. They were opposed to a war of aggression against
the Soviet Union in any case. And they simply could not understand how
the Germans meant to invade the Soviet Union while deporting the Jews
of Europe. Any such mass deportation would have required the
cooperation of the colonial powers, the British and the French, which
would obviously not be proffered to countries that were trying to alter the
world order by force. In simple logistical terms the idea also seemed to
make no sense. How could Poland arrange a deportation of millions of
Jews while the country was mobilized for war? Should the tens of
thousands of Jewish officers and soldiers be pulled from the ranks of the
Polish army? Insofar as the Poles understood German intentions, they
were wary.
Most important was what the Poles did not understand. They could not
grasp a special feature of Nazi thought: the aim to do something difficult
or even impossible, in the secret knowledge that failure would prepare
the way to something still more radical. The geopolitical vision of the
Poles failed them here. They could not see that for the Nazis
“Madagascar” was not simply a place, but a label, a bookmark in a
burning book. It was synonymous with a Final Solution; or, in Himmler’s
words, with “the complete extirpation of the concept of Jews.” For the
Poles, Madagascar was an actual island in the actual Indian Ocean, an
actual possession of the actual French empire, an actual site of an actual
exploratory mission, a subject of actual political discussions, one of two
places (along with Palestine) that were seriously considered as
destination points for a mass migration of Polish Jewry. Polish leaders
did not grasp that for the Nazis the issue was not the feasibility of one
deportation plan, but the creation of general conditions under which
Jews could be destroyed one way or another. Given their own obsession
with the idea of statehood, Poles could not see that a bloody whirlwind of
improvisation was coming, where German aggression would destroy
polities, opening pathways toward the unthinkable. German leaders
would later continue to speak of “Madagascar” even after their men had

killed the Jews who were supposed to emigrate there.
—
Warsaw’s political vision reached as far as the idea of a State of Israel. If a
European crisis was coming, perhaps Jewish rebels such as Avraham
Stern would be able to organize a revolt—one that would lead to a Jewish
state that would welcome millions of Polish Jews. Polish officers had
already begun to train the rebels of Irgun who were to lead such a revolt,
and the young men of Betar who were to be its soldiers. As Hitler and
Ribbentrop were pressing their “comprehensive solution” in December
1938, Drymmer issued instructions that made explicit the final purpose
of Polish policy toward Betar and Irgun. Warsaw was supporting Irgun
and Betar so that they would be ready to press forward with violence to
Jewish statehood when the crisis came.
Over the course of 1938, European states were already collapsing under
Nazi pressure. As the year came to an end, the crisis seemed to be
coming.

4
The State Destroyers

“Overnight! This was all overnight.” Years later, Erika M. still could not
hide her astonishment at the collapse of Austria, at the end of her
country, on the night of the eleventh of March, in the pivotal year of 1938.
The Austria where Erika had spent a very happy Jewish childhood, “the
most wonderful existence a child can have,” was perhaps an unlikely
creation. In 1914, when the First World War began, “Austria” was simply
the informal name of some German-speaking regions of the great power
known as the Habsburg monarchy. When that war came to an end with
the defeat of that empire, Austria was created as a new republic and the
new homeland of those German-speaking people—including about
200,000 Jews, most of them inhabitants of the capital, Vienna. In the
beginning, few believed that the small alpine country could survive.
Lebensunfähig—incapable of life—was the verdict of economists and
politicians alike. The population was only seven million, by comparison
with the fifty-three million of the Habsburg domains. The richest lands of
the old monarchy had fallen to the new state of Czechoslovakia. The
separation of Austria from territories that fell to Poland, Hungary,
Yugoslavia, and Romania destroyed a large and vibrant internal market.
Most Austrians either had little sense of national identity or thought of
themselves as Germans.
The leaders of the new country tried to found it as “German-Austria,”
including in its constitution a promise to seek unification with the larger
German state to its north. This was exactly what the victors in the First
World War—the Americans, the British, and, above all, the French—
wished to prevent. It had been precisely an alliance between Vienna and
Berlin that had begun, as Paris and London saw matters, the bloodiest

war in the history of the world. More than a million French soldiers had
not fallen so that Germany could end the war holding Austrian territories
it had not possessed at the beginning. Thus the peace treaties applied to
Germany and Austria, signed at Versailles and Saint-Germain in 1919,
explicitly forbade each country from uniting with the other. This was, of
course, a resented violation of the principle of national selfdetermination, the moral cause that the American president Woodrow
Wilson had brought to the western allies when the United States joined
the war on the western front in 1917.
The contradictory Austria of the early twentieth century was frozen in
the mind of Hitler and many other Europeans throughout the succeeding
two decades. Hitler had no sympathy for the Habsburg monarchy, the
land of his birth, nor for cosmopolitan Vienna, where he had failed as a
painter. He saw the city as an unhealthy mixture of races, held together
only by the iniquitous plans of the Jews, who held true power. When he
moved from Vienna to Munich in 1912, he believed that he had left a nonGerman city for a German one. It seems that he went to Germany to avoid
mandatory military service in the Habsburg army, but in 1914 he
volunteered for the German one, and served in the trenches as a
messenger during the First World War. A German by choice, he shared
the view of many German soldiers and politicians that the old
multinational monarchy was doomed by its very nature. For Hitler,
Austria had a past that was unworthy of Germans and a future that was
unworthy of mention. He was an Austrian who had joined Germany; at
some point all of the others (except the Jews, of course) would follow.
Although Hitler did not place Austria at the center of his concerns in
the 1920s and 1930s—that place was always held by the Soviet Union—he
took for granted that Austria and Germany would one day be united. His
National Socialist Party, including its paramilitary arms, the SA and SS,
were active in Austria as well as in Germany. In Austria especially, it was
obvious that the work of these racial organizations was directed towards
something more ambitious than an internal transformation of Germany;
after all, Austria and Germany had never in history been united in a
single national state. The prospect of their unification—Anschluss—was
the part of the Nazi program that was most relevant to Austrians.
Yet for Erika M., a Jewish girl whose whole life had been spent in
independent Austria, and whose whole world was changed forever on

March 11, 1938, Austria was real. Over the course of the two decades after
the First World War, an Austrian state was constructed, despite
everything. Austria inherited from the old empire major political parties
with experience in mass politics. The Social Democrats, the largest party
when Austria was established after the war, were discredited immediately
by their failed attempt to join the new republic to Germany. Yet the Social
Democrats ruled without interruption in the Viennese metropolis, the
first socialist party to govern a city of a million people or more on its own.
They built a miniature welfare state known as “Red Vienna,” which
proved to be both popular and successful.
Beyond Vienna, the leading party was the Christian Socials, who, like
their socialist rivals, had a rich history in democratic competition dating
back to the monarchy. Unlike the Social Democrats, however, they had
never believed in unification with some idealized Germany. They
identified with the Roman Catholic religion, the one trait that
distinguished most Austrians from most Germans. Some of them were
monarchists, fondly recalling the old multinational empire.
Jews were relatively more numerous in Austria than in Germany, and
functioned in both of the main Austrian political movements. Most
Austrian Jews lived in Vienna, where most voted for the Social
Democrats. Yet Jews were also to be found in conservative organizations.
The leader of the Austrian monarchist movement, for example, was
Jewish.
Austria’s major political conflict was between these two native
traditions, the Right and the Left. In 1927, the Social Democrats, who had
just won elections, organized a general strike in the capital, but were
unwilling to try to seize total power. In 1934, the Christian Socials backed
right-wing paramilitaries in conflicts with left-wing paramilitaries,
leading to clashes that became a brief civil war. The Austrian regular
army backed the Right, and the Left was crushed. The symbolic end came
as army artillery shelled the great public housing complexes, the pride of
Red Vienna, from the hills beyond the city. The Social Democrats were
then banned, and the Christian Socials reformed themselves as the
largest part of a right-wing coalition known as the Fatherland Front.
Austrian politicians and journalists associated with the Social Democrats
fled the country, among them a considerable number of Jews.

The Nazis were never the largest party in Austria, and never won an
election. They were a significant but distant third in popularity. But with
the socialists humiliated and Hitler’s model in display across the border
after 1933, the Nazis could challenge the Austrian authoritarian regime.
Austrian Nazis assassinated the Austrian chancellor Engelbert Dollfuß on
July 25, 1934, but their coup did not lead to the national revolt they
expected. On the contrary, the murderers were arrested and executed.
Austrian Jews saw the Dollfuß regime as a barrier to National Socialism.
Although the Fatherland Front looked very much like a fascist
organization, complete with its own uniforms and salutes—and even its
own version of a cross meant to compete with the Nazi Hakenkreuz—its
politics were quite different. It identified Austria as “the better Germany”
and Austrians as Germans, but did not identify Germans as a race.
Although there were certainly antisemites in the movement, the
Fatherland Front instituted no antisemitic policies on the model of Hitler.
Despite considerable antisemitism on the Right and even on the Left,
Jews continued to serve in Austrian ministries and to live more or less
unhindered lives as Austrian citizens.
The rise of Hitler to power in Germany in 1933 raised the Austrian
question in a new economic form. Germany’s recovery from the Great
Depression created an attraction that could not be reduced to tradition or
nationalism. Austrians who found jobs in Germany were impressed. Like
its east European neighbors, Austria was an agrarian country and as such
had been wracked by the Great Depression. The Fatherland Front,
despite its radical iconography, was among the most conservative
European governments in its economic policy. Whereas Germany under
the Nazis accumulated huge budget deficits, Austria under the Fatherland
Front pursued a tight fiscal and monetary policy, jealously hoarding its
foreign currency and gold reserves. From Hitler’s perspective, this was
one more reason, and an increasingly pressing one, why Austria needed
Anschluss with the Reich. Germany needed the money.
As Germany asserted its place in Europe, Austria lost its allies. In 1934,
during the failed Nazi coup in Austria, fascist Italy rallied to Austria’s
defense. Benito Mussolini, Italy’s fascist Duce, was still hoping to create
an Italian sphere of influence in the Balkans, Hungary, and Austria. Two
years later, after Hitler had begun to rearm Germany, Mussolini had to
accept the role of partner (and soon junior partner). He washed his hands

of the Austrian question, leaving the matter to Hitler. Thus in 1936, in
what was known as the “Gentlemen’s Agreement,” members of the Nazi
party in Austria were amnestied, and some of them brought into
government. Austrian Nazis used their access to the public sphere to
press the case for an Anschluss. That October, Nazi Germany and fascist
Italy announced their “Axis.” For Vienna this meant political isolation. As
the saying at the time went, the Axis was the spit upon which Austria was
roasted.
In February 1938, Hitler summoned the Austrian chancellor, Kurt von
Schuschnigg, to his residence in the Bavarian Alps. Like his predecessor
Dollfuß, Schuschnigg represented the Christian Socials and the
Fatherland Front—and thus the sovereign Austrian Right that was
opposed to Anschluss. Hitler demanded concessions that would have
meant the end of Austrian sovereignty. Schuschnigg was intimidated, but
upon his return to Vienna he regained his spine. In defiance of Hitler, he
called a referendum on Austrian independence. Hitler was using the
language of self-determination to press a German claim on what Hitler
thought were German territories, so let the Austrian people decide.
Schuschnigg was sure that he would win the referendum: The question
was full of so many desiderata as to make clear that the correct answer
was “yes”; the voting was to be open rather than secret; ballots were to be
issued with answers already printed; much of the Austrian population
really did favor independence in 1938; and, in any event, his regime was
an authoritarian one that could arrange the results as necessary.
The days of March 9 and 10, 1938, were devoted to propaganda in favor
of Austrian independence, over the radio, in the newspapers, and,
following Austrian traditions, in signs painted on the streets of Vienna.
The main propaganda slogan was simply Österreich—Austria.
Abandoned by its former ally Italy and ignored by Great Britain and
France, the country had no external backers. In rallying internal support,
Schuschnigg was hoping to make a case against Hitler’s claims that
European powers might heed. Hitler, understanding the risks, threatened
to invade. Under this second round of threats, Schuschnigg yielded. No
referendum took place.
—

Erika M. was right: Everything really did change overnight. On the
evening of March 11, Austrians sat close to their radios to hear an
important announcement from the chancellor. This was a Friday night,
but Erika’s family, like other observant Jews, broke the Sabbath to listen
to the radio. Although this was probably not a case of immediate threat to
a particular person, which would technically justify the violation of
Jewish law, Viennese Jews were right to think that this radio address was
a matter of life and death. At 7:57 p.m. Schuschnigg announced his
decision not to defend Austria from Hitler. At that moment the Austrian
state in effect ceased to exist. Formal power passed to an Austrian Nazi
lawyer, Arthur Seyß-Inquart, whose program involved the termination of
the entity he now governed. Popular opinion assimilated the meaning of
the end of Austria far more quickly than even Nazis in Vienna or Berlin
expected. That same evening crowds appeared on the streets, shouting
Nazi slogans and looking for Jews to beat. That first night of lawlessness
in Austria was more dangerous for Jews than the preceding two decades
of Austrian statehood. Their world was gone.
The next morning the “scrubbing parties” began. Members of the
Austrian SA, working from lists, from personal knowledge, and from the
knowledge of passersby, identified Jews and forced them to kneel and
clean the streets with brushes. This was a ritual humiliation. Jews, often
doctors and lawyers or other professionals, were suddenly on their knees
performing menial labor in front of jeering crowds. Ernest Pollak
remembered the spectacle of the “scrubbing parties” as “amusement for
the Austrian population.” A journalist described “the fluffy Viennese
blondes, fighting one another to get closer to the elevating spectacle of
the ashen-faced Jewish surgeon on hands and knees before a half-dozen
young hooligans with Swastika armlets and dog-whips.” Meanwhile,
Jewish girls were sexually abused, and older Jewish men forced to
perform public physical exercise.
The symbolic destruction of Jewish status was accompanied by and
enabled theft from Jews. On March 11, 1938, about seventy percent of the
residential property on the Ringstrasse, the beautiful circular avenue that
encloses Vienna’s first district, had belonged to Jews. From the dawn of
the twelfth of March, that percentage decreased by the hour. Jewish
businesses were marked as such, and the automobiles of Jews were
stolen. The SA had made lists of Jewish apartments that their members

wanted for themselves, and this was their chance. Jewish professors and
judges were driven from their offices. Austrian Jews began to commit
suicide: seventy-nine in March, and then sixty-two more in April.
The “scrubbing parties” were also political. Jews were cleaning the
streets at certain places, working with acid, brushes, and their bare hands
to remove one sort of mark. They were erasing a word that had been
painted on Vienna’s avenues only a few days before: “Austria.” That word
had been the slogan of Schuschnigg’s referendum propaganda, of which
Jews could now be portrayed as the organizers. It was also the name of a
state of which Jews had been citizens. Jews were unwriting Austria, and
they were doing it within the circles of onlookers on the streets, under the
gazes and the grins.
Austrians separated themselves from their fellow citizens and the
disappearing state not only by their behavior and by their expressions,
but also by their lapel pins—like the pavement propaganda, another
example of Austrian political culture. Not only Nazis but also people who
had been Social Democrats or Christian Socials before March 11 began to
wear Nazi lapel pins. Standing by during the “scrubbing parties” was thus
by no means a neutral position or a simple act of observation. The very
act of spectating communicated the new group boundaries and assigned
blame for the past. We watch, they perform. The Jews were responsible
for Austria, for that old order, not us. Their punishment now is proof of
their complicity then. Our separation is proof of our innocence. Thus
responsibility was perfectly excised, in perfect bad faith. In an instant,
violence organized by race replaced two decades of political experience.
The Austrian satirist Karl Kraus had written in 1922 that Austria was a
laboratory for the end of the world. It now became a realm of
experimentation for the Germans, with some surprising lessons. One
Viennese Jew recalled that “Austrians became antisemites all of a sudden
and taught the Germans how to treat Jews.” There had been no Austrian
Nuremberg Laws, no restrictions of Jews in public life, no exclusion of
Jews from society. Until the day of Schuschnigg’s address, Jews had been
equal citizens. Jews had an important role in the economy, and some had
performed important functions in the regime. The end of the Austrian
state brought violence against Austrian Jews in five weeks that was
comparable to the suffering that German Jews had endured under Hitler
over the course of five years. The organizers in Austria were usually

Nazis, but they were operating in conditions of state collapse that allowed
their revolution to proceed further and faster. Ironically, the SA, which
had been humiliated in Germany in the Night of the Long Knives in 1934,
did make something like the “second revolution” its murdered leaders
had wanted—only in Austria rather than Germany.
What Austrian Nazis managed to achieve in a matter of hours and days
was indeed an unexpected inspiration for German Nazis. Hitler himself
was pleased and surprised by the immediate support for annexation. On
the Heldenplatz, the grand square beneath the royal castle in Vienna,
Hitler proclaimed the Anschluss. This was on March 15, four days after
Schuschnigg’s capitulation. Along with Hitler came the Nazi leaders who
exploited the anarchy created by the SA and turned it to their own
purposes. On March 28, Hermann Göring required an orderly
redistribution of stolen Jewish property. Some four-fifths of Jewish
businesses in Austria were aryanized by the end of 1938, far surpassing
the pace in Germany itself. In August, Adolf Eichmann, the head of the
Jewish section of Reinhard Heydrich’s SD, established in Vienna a
Central Office for Jewish Emigration.
In 1938, some sixty thousand Jews left Austria, as compared to some
forty thousand who left Germany. And most of those German Jews
emigrated after Nazis applied the lessons that had been learned in
Vienna.
—
In 1935, German Jews had been reduced to second-class citizens. In 1938,
some Nazis discovered that the most effective way to separate Jews from
the protection of the state was to destroy the state. Any legal
discrimination would be complicated by its unforeseen consequences for
other aspects of the law and in bureaucratic practice. Even matters that
might seem simple, such as expropriation and emigration, proceeded
rather slowly in Nazi Germany. When Austria was destroyed, by contrast,
Austria’s Jews no longer enjoyed any state protection and were victimized
by a majority that wished to distance itself from the past and align itself
with the future. Statelessness opened a window of opportunity for those
who were ready for violence and theft. By the very logic of Anschluss, the
Nazi state itself had to close that window, since Austria was meant to

become a part of Germany, and anarchy fomented by the SA would undo
its own ability to rule. But even a moment of temporary statelessness had
profound consequences. March 1938 was the first time that Nazis could
do as they pleased with Jews, and the result was humiliation, pain, and
flight.
—
Avraham Stern, the radical Zionist and client of the Polish regime,
happened to be in central Europe at the time. He was visiting Warsaw for
consultations with Polish authorities after a Revisionist Zionist congress
in Prague in January 1938. On his way back from Poland to Palestine he
stopped in Austria and spoke to the new Nazi authorities about the
emigration of a few right-wing comrades to Palestine—one of the men he
brought out believed that Stern had “negotiated with Eichmann.” This
was the kind of thing that Polish authorities had been hoping that Stern
could do, though on a far larger scale.
On March 15, 1938, the day of the Anschluss, Polish diplomats were
preparing a pro-Zionist request to the Americans. They asked the U.S.
Department of State to pressure the British Foreign Office to open
Palestine to Jewish migrants from Europe. In general the Poles urged
American diplomats to support an independent Israel with the most
expansive possible boundaries. The timing was no coincidence. The
major consequence of Anschluss was exactly the opposite of what the
Polish leadership desired. German policy and Polish policy both aimed to
extrude Jews; now an enlarged Germany was dispatching Jews to Poland.
Some twenty thousand of the Jews in Austria were Polish citizens, many
of whom claimed and received the right to return to their country of
origin. Since America and Palestine remained blocked (except to
daredevils like Stern), Poland could expect ever more Jewish immigration
as German power spread.
Polish diplomats worked unceasingly to open Palestine to Jewish
settlement, but were in no position to force that issue. German
repressions of Jews had led Britain not to soften but to harden its line on
Jewish immigration to Palestine. The Polish foreign ministry asked the
Polish parliament after the Anschluss for the right to review the
documentation of all citizens who had resided abroad for longer than five

years. This was granted on March 31, 1938. Although the law and most of
the internal bureaucratic correspondence avoided the word “Jew,” the
purpose of the new policy was clear: to block the next wave of returning
Polish Jews. As Drymmer himself put it, the goal was “excluding the
unworthy and above all disposing of the destructive element,” by which
he certainly meant Jews. This was a qualitative change in Polish
citizenship policy, occasioned by the pressure of Anschluss and
immigration limits in Palestine and the United States, and inspired by
German examples. Until 1938, Polish diplomats, whatever their personal
feelings, had intervened on behalf of all Polish citizens, including Jews.
The Nazis understood the implications of the Polish initiative for the
sixty thousand or so Jews of Polish citizenship residing in Germany in
1938. If these people lost their Polish citizenship while living in Germany,
it would become very difficult to expel them later to Poland. Berlin asked
Warsaw for a delay in the application of the Polish law, and the German
coercive apparatus was mobilized for its greatest stroke thus far. With
Himmler’s approval, Heydrich arranged for the forcible expulsion of
some seventeen thousand Jews of Polish citizenship across the GermanPolish border on the night of October 28. This was a shockingly massive
exercise of coercion by the standards of the day. It was also the first major
action of such a kind by the SS, whose capacity for violence expanded
rapidly at the German border. The surprise deportation of Jews from
Germany to Poland was a strange contrast to the words of Hitler, who
was speaking just at this time to the Polish government about a common
Jewish policy.
—
In European capitals in 1938, state destruction could appear to be
something that happened to other people, perhaps even as a beneficial
correction of the postwar order. Neither the western powers nor the Poles
concerned themselves with the passing of Austria. The Jewish perspective
was different: Jews could see the beginning of a general process of
separation from European states, and began to sense that they had
nowhere to go. In July 1938, representatives of thirty-two countries, led
by the United States, discussed Jewish emigration at Évian-les-Bains in
France. Only the Dominican Republic agreed to take any Jews. The

various ways that Jews were separated from the state in Europe,
meanwhile, began to interact and mutually reinforce. The German
destruction of Austria brought Jews to Poland. Warsaw reacted by
seeking to deny citizenship to Polish Jews living abroad. Berlin
responded by expelling such people across the Polish border. By the
standards of the time and place, this seemed to Jews like a catastrophe,
above all to the individuals and families concerned. Very often these were
people whose whole lives were in Germany and whose connections to
Poland were quite limited.
The Grynszpan family, for example, had moved to Germany from the
Russian Empire in 1911, seven years before Poland had regained
independence. The children had been born in Germany, spoke German,
and regarded themselves as Germans. They held Polish passports after
1918 because their parents hailed from a part of the Russian Empire that
had become Poland. In 1935, the Grynszpans sent their son Herschel,
then fifteen, to stay with an aunt and uncle in Paris. By 1938, his Polish
passport and his German visa had both expired, and he had been denied
legal residency in France. His aunt and uncle had to hide him in a garret
so that he would not be expelled. On November 3, they showed him a
postcard from his sister, mailed right after the family had been deported
from Germany to Poland: “everything is finished for us.” The next day
Herschel Grynszpan bought a gun, took the metro to the German
embassy, asked to meet a German diplomat, and shot the one who agreed
to see him. It was, as he confessed to the French police, an act of revenge
for the suffering of his family and his people.
Some of the top Nazis saw an opportunity to move toward a Final
Solution on the territory of Germany. With Hitler’s permission, Goebbels
organized the coordinated attacks on Jewish property and synagogues on
the night of November 9 that came to be known, as a result of all the
broken glass, as Kristallnacht. The official pogroms were indeed a
shattering experience for many German Jews. Some two hundred of them
were killed or committed suicide. The deliberate violence in Germany
itself in November 1938 was thus the closing of a circle that was opened
with the destruction of the Austrian state. The Anschluss had led to the
flight of Jews to Poland; this prompted new Polish restrictions on Jews
living abroad; this led the Germans to expel Polish Jews; this caused an
assassination in Paris that served as a pretext for organized violence in

Germany. The Kristallnacht pogroms showed not only what the
destruction of Austria had enabled, but also the limits of applying the
violent side of the Austrian model within Germany. In Austria, public
violence was possible during the interval between the end of Austrian
authority and the consolidation of German authority. Such an opening
could not really be created in Germany. The German state was to be
mutated but not destroyed.
With Kristallnacht, Goebbels did show that the Austrian model of
expropriation and emigration could function in Germany. It was only
after violence had actually been delivered on a national scale that German
Jews began to leave their homeland in large numbers. Nevertheless,
disorderly violence within the Reich itself was revealed to be a dead end.
Most of German public opinion was opposed to the chaos. Visible despair
led to expressions of sympathy with Jews, rather than the spiritual
distancing that Nazis expected. Of course, it was possible for Germans
not to wish to see violence inflicted upon Jews while at the same time not
wishing to see Jews at all. Göring, Himmler, and Heydrich immediately
drew the conclusion that inspiring pogroms inside Germany had been a
mistake. Not long after they would organize pogroms in much the same
way as Goebbels had, but beyond the borders of Germany, in time of war,
in places where German force had destroyed the state.
Hitler did nothing to defend Goebbels, whom he had unleashed in the
first place, and said nothing in public about Kristallnacht. Three days
after Kristallnacht, Göring said that Hitler would now approach the
western powers with a Madagascar plan for the resettlement of Jews. Two
weeks after Kristallnacht, Hitler was discussing the deportation of
European Jews to Madagascar with confused Polish diplomats. The Poles
could not understand how Germans could intend such a complicated
logistical operation when all they seemed able to organize was chaos in
Austria and Germany. Furthermore, in light of the consequences of
previous German policy towards Jews, and in the context of the ongoing
discussions of a “comprehensive solution” to the problems of GermanPolish relations, the idea had a whiff of blackmail. More than thirty
thousand Jews had been delivered by German policy to Poland thus far in
1938. If Poland agreed to improve relations with Germany on the terms
proposed by Hitler, then Germany would stop sending Jews to Poland
and instead cooperate in sending them somewhere else. The Jewish

question had become a source of tension in German-Polish relations.
German pressure was one reason Hitler’s idea of a comprehensive
solution of German-Polish problems, with its promise of joint policy on
Jewish matters, was unattractive.
In Warsaw in 1938, Hitler’s negotiating style, so effective in Vienna,
had an effect opposite to what was intended.
—
Over the course of 1938, as Hitler was seeking, with success, to destroy
the Austrian state, and working, without success, to recruit Poland as an
ally, he was also trying to provoke a conflict over Czechoslovakia. The
pretext was the status of the three million Czechoslovak citizens who
identified themselves as Germans. In February 1938, as Hitler was
threatening Austrian leaders, he also declared that the Germans of
Czechoslovakia were under his personal protection. This had no legal
meaning, but that was the point: States did not matter but races did;
conventions did not matter but the personal decisions of the Führer did.
When Austria fell in March 1938, the future of Czechoslovakia darkened.
Hitler had no sincere interest in the German minority question in
Czechoslovakia or anywhere else. In his worldview, Germans were a race
and had a right to what they could conquer for themselves. Hitler meant
to use minority questions to confuse enemies and to foment the war in
which all Germans would prove their racial mettle. He raised what he
thought were impossible demands on behalf of Germans in
Czechoslovakia, and was then frustrated when Czechoslovakia and its
allies gave him everything that he said he wanted. The result was a
second improvised destruction of a European state, further worsening the
position of Europe’s Jews.
Czechoslovakia, like Austria, was a creation of the peace treaties after
the First World War. Whereas Austria, as a rump successor state of the
Habsburg monarchy, was punished as an enemy, the new state of
Czechoslovakia was meant as a reward to people seen as allies. Before the
First World War, Czech politicians had always been rather comfortable
within the Habsburg monarchy, whose multinational character and
liberal constitution protected Czechs from domination by Germans. It
was only when the monarchy’s existence was threatened that they began

to speak about an independent state. By the middle of the First World
War, it seemed probable that the old monarchy was doomed whether it
won or lost. If it won, it would be nothing more than a satellite of
Germany, which would oppress the Czechs. If it lost, it would be
destroyed by triumphant democracies of the West. In this situation, a few
Czechs began to lobby for recognition in the western capitals. Because
theirs was a small people, they claimed that Slovaks also belonged to the
same nation. Because they wished their state to be defensible, they asked
for mountain ranges inhabited mainly by Germans. Czechoslovakia was
established on the principle of self-determination, with a generous
admixture of political realism.
Czechoslovakia was thus like the old Habsburg monarchy: It was
multinational and liberal. Unlike its neighbors, it maintained a
democratic system through 1938. As Hitler sought to dismantle
Czechoslovakia, he called the mountainous territories inhabited by
Germans the invented name “Sudetenland,” which falsely suggested that
they had some historic unity. Although the region defined by Hitler had a
German majority overall, it included zones that had Czech majorities. It
also included Czechoslovakia’s natural defenses, as well as the impressive
fortifications built up by the Czechoslovak army. The Czechoslovak
armaments industry was the best in Europe at the time, and Hitler’s zone
also included its major factories. The famous Škoda works, one of the
most impressive industrial complexes in Europe, was three miles inside
the border of the “Sudetenland.”
Czechoslovakia was a creation of the western democracies and saw
itself as one of them. It was an ally of France and enjoyed some sympathy
in Britain, though perhaps less than it deserved. Wiser heads in Paris
understood that Hitler’s proclaimed defense of the Germans was a
political preparation for an invasion of Czechoslovakia, which, if the
French fulfilled their treaty obligation, would lead to a general European
war. The Soviet Union now expressed an interest in the well-being of
Czechoslovakia and made overtures to Paris. French leaders hoped for an
arrangement with Moscow that might deter Hitler, or at least decrease
the likelihood that France would have to face Germany alone.
Unfortunately for the French, at precisely this time the Soviet NKVD
was in the midst of executing half of the higher officers of the Red Army
in a tremendous wave of terror. Although the details were not known to

the French general staff, French officers and diplomats did notice that
their Soviet interlocutors kept disappearing without a trace. Even absent
this demoralizing development, the French would have needed to
convince either Poland or Romania to allow Soviet forces to cross their
countries. The USSR shared no border with Czechoslovakia, and so any
intervention by the Red Army would involve the passage of Soviet troops
through a third country. In Warsaw and Bucharest, the Czechoslovak
crisis began to look like the pretext for a Soviet intervention in central
Europe. The Poles and Romanians feared a Soviet invasion of their own
countries more than a German invasion of Czechoslovakia.
In September, the second European crisis of 1938 reached its height.
Hitler had ordered preparations for war with Czechoslovakia in May, with
an expected invasion in October. He had also instructed the leaders of the
German national minority to escalate their demands. On September 12,
Hitler gave a rousing although factually absurd speech about the need to
rescue Germans from Czech policies of extermination and to do away
with Czechoslovakia generally. There was nothing at all inevitable about
the fulfillment of his wishes. The Czechoslovak state was quite impressive
in most respects; indeed, in its combination of prosperity and freedom, it
was unmatched in central Europe and perhaps on the entire continent.
Open talk of the destruction of Czechoslovakia made the destruction
possible, especially insofar as European leaders could persuade
themselves that yielding to such rhetoric somehow meant yielding to
reason.
Even as London and Paris urged Prague to compromise, the Soviets
provided indications of their willingness to intervene in central Europe to
protect Czechoslovakia. Four Soviet army groups were moved to the
Polish border. Three days after Hitler’s speech, the Soviet regime
accelerated the ethnic cleansing of its western borderlands. From
September 15 onward Soviet authorities carried out swift mass executions
in the Polish Operation without any sort of review. Local authorities
formed “troikas”—groups of three—from the local party head, procurator,
and ranking NKVD officer. The troikas could sentence people to death
and carry out the sentence without awaiting any sort of confirmation.
Oral instructions made clear that “Poles should be completely destroyed.”
Throughout the territory of Soviet Ukraine, which bordered Poland,
Polish men were shot in huge numbers in September 1938. In the city of

Voroshilovgrad (today Luhansk), Soviet authorities considered 1,226
cases in the Polish Operation during the Czechoslovak crisis and ordered
1,226 executions. In September 1938, in the regions of Soviet Ukraine
adjacent to the Polish border, Soviet units went from village to village as
death squads. Polish men were shot, Polish women and children were
sent to the Gulag, and reports were filed afterward. In the Zhytomyr
region, which bordered Poland, Soviet authorities sentenced 100 people
to death on September 22, 138 more on September 23, and 408 more on
September 28.
That was the day that Hitler had set as the deadline for an invasion of
Czechoslovakia. The German army was standing at the Czechoslovak
border. The Red Army was standing at the Polish border; and the NKVD
had cleared the hinterland of suspicious elements by massive shootings
and deportations of Poles. A German invasion of Czechoslovakia would
have provided the pretext for a Soviet invasion of Poland. Perhaps the
Red Army would then have entered Czechoslovakia and sought to engage
the German army. More likely it would have sought some truce with
Germany that allowed it to take territory from Poland without having to
engage the Germans. The suspicion is warranted, since the next time
Soviet forces massed at the Polish border it was eleven months later, after
Moscow had made just such a deal with Berlin. But this cannot be known
for certain, since the crisis was resolved. At Munich on September 30,
1938, the leaders of Britain, France, Italy, and Germany decided that
Czechoslovakia should cede the territories that Hitler wanted.
Czechoslovakia had no part in this Munich accord and was not legally
bound by it. Abandoned by their friends and allies, its leaders decided not
to fight the Germans alone. As Czechoslovak troops and police withdrew
from the “Sudetenland” in October, political violence prevailed: mostly
Germans attacking other Germans, pro-Nazis killing the rival Social
Democrats whose orientation had been illegal in Nazi Germany for five
years. In November the “Sudetenland” was joined to Germany—Germans,
Czechs, mountains, fortresses, arms factories, and all. An Einsatzgruppe
entered with the assignment of eliminating political opponents; its
members were explicitly forbidden to kill. The thirty thousand or so Jews
who had lived there, like the Jews of Austria a few months earlier, found
themselves suddenly deprived of state protection. About seventeen
thousand of them were deported by the Germans or fled; they lost their

property. In what remained of Czechoslovakia, Jews rightly feared the
total destruction of their state and thus the loss of their property rights.
About a third of Czechoslovak banking and industrial capital was owned
by Jews; much of this was acquired at tremendous discount by Germans
in late 1938 and early 1939.
—
Poland bordered all parties most concerned by the crisis of state
destruction of 1938: Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia, and the Soviet
Union. Warsaw had no sympathy for Prague, since the Czechoslovak
army had seized some important industrial territory around Teschen in
1919 when the Polish army had been busy fighting the Soviets. Polish
diplomats wrote of Czechoslovakia as an “artificial creation” and an
“absurdity.” While Berlin presented itself as the defender of the rights of
the German minority in Czechoslovakia, Warsaw followed suit and
presented itself as the protector of Poles in Czechoslovakia. When
Germany seized the territories it called the Sudetenland, Poland exploited
the moment to claim the Teschen region that Czechoslovakia had taken in
1919.
Poland looked like a German ally in these days, although its policy was,
in fact, an independent one that Warsaw had to explain to Berlin. Poland
wanted the Teschen region for some of the same reasons that Germany
wanted the Sudetenland: It was rich in resources, rail connections, and
industry. Teschen would help Poland prepare for war, but Germans could
not be entirely sure on which side Poland would be fighting. Polish
diplomats tried to get credit in Berlin for their “decided position” against
the Soviet Union, with no effect. Hitler was consciously provoking a
European war, and would have taken it in whatever form it came. He
could not be impressed that Poland had proven to be a barrier to a Soviet
intervention in Czechoslovakia when what he really wanted was an
offensive war against the Soviet Union. He expected much more from the
Poles than an imitation of German policy in these local crises, and he was
telling them so.
By November 1938, Germany had absorbed Austria and much of
Czechoslovakia. Some nine million people had been added to the Reich,
along with Austria’s gold and Czechoslovakia’s arms. No doubt Hitler

thought that these gains made his offer of a “comprehensive solution” to
German-Polish problems more difficult for the Polish leadership to
refuse. After all, Germany had shown that it could take what it wanted in
any case. Hitler believed that Warsaw had no choice but to recognize
common interests with respect to the Jews and the Soviet Union. But
Warsaw saw the Jewish and the Soviet questions rather differently than
did Berlin, and it viewed growing German power as a source of worry
rather than as a reason for compromise. The Poles understood, since the
Germans had said so for years, that territorial adjustments in central
Europe were only a small part of a much larger plan.
The destruction of Austria and Czechoslovakia raised the Jewish and
eastern questions in ways that were disturbing in Warsaw. The
“scrubbing parties” and Kristallnacht had brought tens of thousands of
Jews to Poland. The Munich accords, meanwhile, opened the issue of the
future of all Czechoslovak territories, including the far eastern region
known as Subcarpathian Ruthenia. Germany declared the region
autonomous in October 1938. By the terms of the First Vienna Award of
November 1938, a southern zone was ceded to Hungary, and Germany
then recognized the remainder as a state. Warsaw had some influence in
the new statelet for two weeks in October, until its men were displaced by
Avgustyn Voloshyn and other Ukrainian nationalists. These were people
who believed that the Polish state should be dismantled and a Ukrainian
state created from its territories. German-backed Ukrainian revisionists
were thus in control of a sensitive territory on Poland’s border just as the
future of German-Polish relations was being decided. During these last
weeks of 1938, it appeared in Warsaw that Berlin was using Ukrainian
nationalism against Poland—at the very moment that German diplomats
were promising Poland Ukrainian territory from the Soviet Union.
Germany wanted Polish territorial concessions and promised three
things in return: a war against the Soviet Union, a resolution of the
Jewish question, and territory from Ukraine. Polish authorities wanted
no war, and doubted German goodwill on all three issues. German
proposals seemed either contradictory or made in bad faith. Uncertainty
about Ukraine was a further reason, as 1938 came to a close, why Hitler’s
proposal of a “comprehensive solution” failed to find support in Warsaw.
—

As 1939 began, Hitler finally faced international resistance he could not
overcome with words. On the fifth of January, Polish foreign minister
Józef Beck rejected Hitler’s proposals after a personal conversation. The
Poles were prepared to offer concessions on the issues of Danzig and the
corridor, but these of course were not the issue. From Hitler’s perspective
these territorial matters were propaganda signals to German public
opinion that his revisionism had something to do with what most
Germans wanted. Beck was uninterested in Hitler’s main offer: vague
promises of resolving the Jewish question and territorial gains in Ukraine
after a joint attack on the Soviet Union. Thus Poland was revealed to be a
problem, a barrier rather than a bridge to Hitler’s main object of
dispatching Germans to a fateful war of racial destruction in the East. In
these weeks the Poles did try to tilt their foreign policy back toward
Moscow.

Hitler’s problem was that his Polish interlocutors understood his
foreign policy, if not well, then at least better than the German public did.
The German foreign minister, Joachim von Ribbentrop, made a final
effort on the twenty-fifth of January, a symbolic date, the five-year
anniversary of the signing of the German-Polish nonaggression
declaration. Once again Ukraine was the bait. Once again the Germans
failed. Polish diplomats asked Ribbentrop not to claim in Berlin that any
agreement had been or might be reached. On the very day of that
conversation, the New York Times published an article in which Poland’s
foreign minister Beck presented the Soviet Union as an equal to Nazi
Germany in its foreign policy. By calling both neighbors “allies” in front
of the foreign press, Beck made clear that Poland would not join either in
a war against the other. Ribbentrop returned to Berlin the next day with
the certainty that Poland would never be a German ally against the Soviet
Union.
The day of Ribbentrop’s return from Warsaw was a Thursday; the
following Monday, Hitler gave the most notorious speech of his career.
On January 30, 1939, Hitler proclaimed to the German parliament that if
the Jews began a world war, it would end with their extermination.
Poland had always been a matter of practice rather than theory for Hitler,
and now improvisation gave way to rage. The particular style of
international politics he had developed in 1938, the destruction of
neighbors with words rather than weapons, had failed. His specific
calculation about Poland, that its leaders would join in an antisemitic
crusade against the USSR, had proven wrong. Both promises and threats
regarding Jewish and Ukrainian questions had failed. The Polish choice
was the end of a Nazi illusion that had lasted for five years.
Hitler decided to eliminate Poland as an object of international
relations. The sudden necessity he felt to invade Poland had tremendous
implications for Hitler’s plans. With Poland as an ally or benign neutral,
Germany might have avoided the traditional problem of encirclement, its
doom in the First World War. In such a scenario Germany could first
invade France and remove the French army from the war, and then turn
its attention to the real target, the riches of the Soviet Union. In Hitler’s
basic scheme, Germany was to smash the USSR and become a world
power after France was beaten and as the British (and the Americans) sat
by and watched. Having redeemed the German race, attained continental

power, and begun the grand project of planetary salvation from the Jews,
Germany could later confront the British and the Americans as necessary.
But with Poland as an adversary, the entire calculus was altered. As of
January 30, 1939, as a result of his determination to begin a war despite
his Polish miscalculation, Hitler had to contemplate a global conflict that
would begin not after but before he won his European war. A German
invasion of Poland might bring France into a war against Germany, thus
creating encirclement. Worse still, it might draw in the United Kingdom,
an eventuality Hitler always hoped to avoid. If Germany had to fight a
long war in the west it was then to be feared that the USSR might
intervene from the east.
Of course, in Hitler’s mind, any such insidious alliance against
Germany would have to be the work of Jews. Since Jews, he believed,
held the real power in foreign capitals, they would be the ones to
determine whether or not a German invasion of Poland in 1939 actually
did become a world war. If Jews could be made to understand that a
world war was not in their interest, Hitler seems to have believed, then
France and Britain and the Soviet Union would stay out of the initial
conflict. If the Jews could be deterred with threats, then the German war
against Poland could remain a local conflict in eastern Europe, a minor
setback in Hitler’s plans rather than a major disruption. Thus Hitler’s
failed Polish policy did not lead to warnings to the Poles. It led to
warnings to the Jews.
Hitler’s notion that a threat to exterminate Jews would influence the
future policy of the great powers was erroneous. The January 30, 1939,
“prophecy,” as Hitler would call it in later speeches, had no resonance in
Paris, London, or Moscow. What did matter was the continuation of
German aggression in Czechoslovakia a few weeks later. On March 15,
1939, Germany moved forward to complete the destruction of that
country, incorporating the Czech lands of Bohemia and Moravia as a
“Protectorate” and creating an independent Slovak state that was to be an
ally of Germany. Those who had betrayed Czechoslovakia to Germany at
Munich in September 1938 were now betrayed by Germany in their turn.
Since Hitler had taken lands that were populated by Czechs rather than
Germans, it was clear that his claims to be interested only in national
self-determination were lies. Those in London and Paris who had covered
their complicity in the rape of Czechoslovakia with guilty references to

the First World War realized that they had helped prepare the way for a
Second. Paris and London in March 1939 now found themselves reaching
the same conclusion as Warsaw had in December: Germany was about to
undertake a massive war of aggression in which the only choices were
resistance and submission.
On March 21, 1939, a few days after the destruction of Czechoslovakia,
Germany unveiled its new propaganda line towards Poland. After five
years of coordinating his propaganda with Warsaw, Goebbels could
finally say what he, and no doubt many Germans, actually thought. From
one day to the next Poland was again the ancient enemy, the oppressor of
Germans, the grasping and monstrous creation of an unjust postwar
settlement. Hitler’s diplomatic misfortune with Warsaw was good luck in
domestic politics. War was not popular with Germans in 1939. But a war
against Poland for border territories, now apparently in the offing, was
far less unpopular than a massive ideological war of aggression in alliance
with Poland against the Soviet Union would have been.
On March 25, 1939, Hitler ordered preparations for a war of
destruction against Poland. Aside from the political preliminaries
directed to Germany and world public opinion, the planned campaign
had nothing to do with Danzig or an extraterritorial corridor. Indeed, it
had little to do with war as conventionally understood. What Hitler
suddenly wanted was the complete annihilation of the Polish state and
the physical elimination of all Poles who might be capable of building
such a state. He would say as much, repeatedly, in the weeks to come.
This radical plan to destroy a polity and a political nation was consistent
with his general ideas about Slavs, and the invasion was a step eastward
towards the Ukrainian breadbasket. It was however inconsistent both
with his actions of the previous five years and with the announced
reasons for German hostility now appearing in the press. The goal of the
propaganda was to propel Germans, unknowingly, into a far greater
conflict in the East.
The Poles were in a relatively good position to know what the war
would be about. They knew that their choice was not between war and
peace, as British prime minister Neville Chamberlain had thought at
Munich, but between one kind of war and another: an offensive campaign
as a German ally against the Soviet Union, or a defensive campaign
against a German attack. If Poland had chosen a submissive alliance

rather than a defiant resistance, thought Foreign Minister Beck, “We
would have defeated Russia, and afterward we would be taking Hitler’s
cows out to pasture in the Urals.” Beck, who after a long tenure as foreign
minister had made many enemies in Europe, now made a hero of himself
by resisting Hitler in public. On the fifth of May, 1939, responding to
Hitler’s speeches, he addressed the Polish parliament. He used the kind
of language that, until that point, no statesman, including those enjoying
greater safety and power, had directed to Hitler. There could be
compromise on various issues. But there could be no compromise on
sovereignty. “There is only one thing in the life of people, nations, and
states that is without price,” said Beck, “and that thing is honor.”
—
Yet neither the collapse of German-Polish relations nor the threat of war
with Germany had any effect on Polish policy towards its own Jews. That
policy had always been a sovereign one, arising from popular
antisemitism and mass unemployment, calculated from assumptions
about Polish interests. From the Polish perspective, Germany was a
confusing and unhelpful partner on the Jewish question, whose policies
had closed the gates to Palestine and driven tens of thousands of Jews to
Poland. When Britain responded to German aggression against
Czechoslovakia by guaranteeing Poland’s security, this opened, from
Warsaw’s perspective, the possibility of a promising new partnership in
Jewish policy. Great Britain, after all, held the mandate to Palestine and
determined how many European Jews could emigrate there.
Polish relations with Britain in the 1930s had been cool, and until
spring 1939 diplomats had no good occasion to raise the Palestinian
issue. In Geneva, at meetings of the League of Nations, Polish diplomats
buttonholed their British counterparts and tried to explain the need for
the immigration of Polish Jews to Palestine, but this could easily be
turned aside. The closest thing the Poles had to an argument was that the
world was focused only on the very small German Jewish population,
while ignoring the much bigger Polish Jewish population. Polish
diplomats cautiously made the case that an opening of Palestine only for
German Jews (which did not, in any case, happen) would be seen inside
Poland as unfair. In spring 1939 Polish diplomats could raise the matter

of Jewish emigration apropos of something very important: the coming
war.
When Beck flew to London in April 1939 for discussions that were
supposed to concern the German threat to Europe, he treated the Jewish
question as though it were the first order of business. Since Beck and the
British foreign secretary, Lord Halifax, hardly knew each other, this
priority led to a surreal exchange. Knowing of Beck’s preoccupations,
Halifax had tried to get his ambassador in Warsaw to explain to the Poles
that the two states had no “colonial question” to discuss. Halifax paid no
heed to Beck when he raised the Palestine question, and British policy
was moving in a direction opposite to Polish preferences. That same
month, Prime Minister Chamberlain said that if Britain had to anger one
side in Palestine it should be the Jews rather than the Arabs. The loyalty
of Arabs and Muslims was too important in the British Empire as a whole
to be challenged, especially at a time of coming conflict. A British White
Paper of May 1939 recommended that future Jewish immigration to
Palestine be made subject to Arab approval. London had decided to
protect Poland from the German threat and in this sense, indirectly,
Poland’s Jews. But the British were completely unmoved by the Polish
idea that Palestine should be opened to massive Jewish settlement
immediately.
Despite Warsaw’s new relationship with London, the conspiratorial
track of Poland’s Palestine policy remained operative in spring 1939.
Polish authorities maintained their friendly relationship with the
Revisionist Zionist leader Vladimir Jabotinsky, who after Kristallnacht
had hoped for an evacuation of a million Jews in 1939. He knew that his
Polish patrons would make his case to the British. In the early months of
the year, Jabotinsky, like his Polish partners, believed that the prospect of
war might create an opening in London. He wanted to form Jewish
legions that would fight for the British against the Germans, with the
hope that the political capital thus earned could be converted into British
support of a State of Israel after the war. Yet more and more of his
followers were thinking not of the legionary but the terrorist strategy,
whereby an empire weakened by war could be driven from the national
homeland. Polish policy was aligned with the Jewish rebels whom the
British had most reason to fear.
Between February and May 1939, at the very time that Britain and

Poland joined forces against Germany, Polish military intelligence was
training a select group of Irgun activists in a secret location near
Andrychów. The Polish officers stressed the kinds of measures that Poles
had used with success during and after the First World War: sabotage,
bombings, and irregular warfare against an occupying army. The twentyfive Jews who were trained came from Palestine, but the language of
instruction was Polish (with a Hebrew translation). At the end of the
session Avraham Stern arrived and gave a rousing speech. In Polish he
thanked the Polish officers for their support and noted the similarities
between the Jewish and Polish liberation struggles. In Hebrew he
described the future Jewish invasion of Palestine. As one of the
participants later noted with a certain amount of understatement, “the
Polish government’s support of the Irgun could be viewed as an
unfriendly act toward Britain, with whom Poland wanted to sign a
treaty.”
The men to whom Stern spoke became Irgun officers who would lead
the revolt against the British. When they returned to Palestine in May
1939, just as the British White Paper was published, and right after
Poland accepted a British security guarantee, these Jewish radicals began
to employ their Polish weapons and training in operations against
Poland’s new ally. The British noticed the training and confiscated some
of the weapons, but never made the connection to Warsaw.
—
Polish military intelligence officers excelled in the kinds of insurgency in
which they trained Irgun, as they did in certain aspects of
counterintelligence work. A special unit of military intelligence, for
example, had broken the mechanized German code system known as
“Enigma,” and built duplicates of the machine in order to decode
messages. In July 1939, Polish cryptologists passed on their knowledge
and these duplicates to their British and French allies. This work would
be important for the British later in the war, providing the basis for the
decryption station at Bletchley Park. In their estimations of just how the
war would unfold, however, the men and women of Polish intelligence
committed a major error.
After 1933, Polish military intelligence, the Second Department of the

General Staff, regarded both the Soviet Union and Nazi Germany as
threats, with the Soviets seen as the more worrisome. The debate at the
top of the Second Department was about whether a Soviet or a German
invasion was more likely. Few if any officers recognized that Poland’s own
decision not to ally with Nazi Germany would lead to a rapid German
invasion of Poland. Once Britain and France had guaranteed Poland’s
sovereignty, Germany faced encirclement from west and east. Hitler had
lost, at least for the time being, any hope for the constellation he wanted:
British indifference or support during a German war against the Soviet
Union. Poland, which was not supposed to make a difference one way or
the other, had altered the basic calculation of My Struggle. Logically,
Germany’s only chance to avoid encirclement lay to the east of Poland:
the Soviet Union itself. And this was the logic that Hitler indeed followed.
The Poles could be forgiven for not expecting this. They strongly
suspected that Germany planned to invade the Soviet Union. Yet few
people in Warsaw or elsewhere could anticipate Hitler’s rapid changes in
tactics. Seeing only the final goal as important, he was capable of doing
almost anything along the way. Thus after a whole career of anticommunism and after five years of recruiting Poland for a war against the
Soviet Union, Hitler decided to ask the Soviet Union for a war against
Poland. On August 20, 1939, he requested a meeting between his foreign
minister, Ribbentrop, and the Soviet leadership. Stalin had been hoping
for something like this. Berlin could offer what London and Paris could
not: the remaking of eastern Europe. After German policy openly shifted
against Poland in the spring, Stalin made a telling gesture towards Hitler.
Knowing that Hitler had pledged never to make peace with Jewish
communists, he fired his Jewish commissar for foreign affairs, Maxim
Litvinov, a few weeks after the public break between Germany and
Poland. Hitler told army commanders that “Litvinov’s dismissal was
decisive.” When Ribbentrop arrived in Moscow he spoke with Viacheslav
Molotov, a Russian.
The agreement signed by Ribbentrop and Molotov on August 23, 1939,
was much more than a nonaggression pact. It included a secret protocol
that divided Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Poland into Soviet
and German spheres of influence. Poland was split between the two, with
the obvious implication that the Soviets would join the Germans in
invading the country and cooperate in the destruction of the state and

political society. The precise contents of the secret protocol did not have
to be known for the meaning of the accord to be clear to intelligent
observers. Peace with the Soviet Union meant, at the very least, a free
hand for Hitler.
By chance the World Zionist Congress was in session in Geneva when
news of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact was reported by the world’s press.
The Jews gathered from Europe and the four corners of the world were
shocked. The leader of the General Zionists, Chaim Weizmann, closed the
congress with the words “Friends, I have only one wish: that we all
remain alive.” There was no melodrama in this. The regions covered by
the secret protocol of the Soviet-German agreement were a heartland of
world Jewry, continuously settled by Jews for half a millennium. This
heartland was about to become the most dangerous place for Jews in
their entire history. A Holocaust would begin there twenty months later.
Within three years, most of the millions of Jews who lived there would be
dead.
—
For Stalin, the deal with Hitler was a great relief. He and many of his
comrades had read Hitler’s writings and took them seriously. Stalin
understood that Hitler aimed for the fertile farmland of Ukraine and said
as much on a number of occasions. In agreeing to divide eastern Europe
with Hitler, he hoped to divert the armed conflict to western Europe,
where Britain and France would have to deal with the Germans. From a
Soviet ideological perspective, this meant that the contradictions of
capitalism were working themselves out on the battlefield, with the help
of a nudge from Soviet diplomacy. From Stalin’s tactical perspective, the
best way to fight a war was to allow others to bleed themselves white, and
then move to take the spoils.
Just as pertinent as Stalin’s calculations about future conflict was his
present community of interests with Hitler. In 1939, Hitler reached the
same conclusion that Stalin had reached in 1934: Since Poland was no
longer a conceivable ally in a European war, it had no reason to exist.
Molotov spoke of Poland as the “ugly offspring” and Hitler of Poland as
the “unreal creation” of Versailles. Stalin proclaimed a “common desire to
get rid of the old equilibrium.” He knew that the breaking of the old

balance meant anarchy and pain for Jews. He was aware that dividing
Poland in half meant giving two million Jews to Hitler. The Treaty on
Borders and Friendship that the Soviets and Germans signed on
September 28, 1939, shifted Warsaw, which capitulated that day to
German siege, from the Soviet to the German zone. Stalin thus granted
Europe’s most important Jewish city to Hitler. The joint invasion of
Poland, Stalin said, meant a friendship with Germany sealed “in blood.”
Much of the blood shed in wartime Poland would be that of Jewish
civilians, including three hundred thousand Jews of Warsaw.
Aside from Soviet and German propagandists, working in harmony,
few people could find anything good in the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact.
One exception, thousands of miles away, was American evangelists,
known as dispensationalists, who believed in a coming Armageddon in
which they would be transported to heaven. They read the improbable
accord between Nazis and Stalinists as the realization of a biblical
prophecy (Ezekiel 38) of an alliance between Gog and Gomer that would
attack the Land of Israel and thus fulfill one of the preconditions for the
return of the messiah.
Avraham Stern in Palestine concluded from the Molotov-Ribbentrop
pact that Hitler was more pragmatic than he appeared. If the Führer
would deal with a Soviet Union that he had always condemned as a front
for Jewish power, then why not with Jews themselves? Perhaps the
coming conflict would, despite everything, provide Jews with some sort of
opportunity for redemption. Stern, who had drunk deeply from the cup of
secular messianism, was not so far away from the Americans who
imagined Jesus returning as a savior bearing a sword rather than an olive
branch, massacring his enemies rather than loving them. Stern’s poetic
inspiration Uri Zvi Greenberg wrote of the messiah arriving on a tank.
Stern himself prophesied that the blood of Jews would be the red carpet
for the messiah, adorned by the white lilies of the brains blown from their
skulls.
—
Stern was about to lose a patron in a bloody tragedy that was equal to the
darkest poetic fantasy. On August 22, 1939, Hitler told his generals that
the “destruction of Poland” was “in the foreground. The goal is to destroy

living forces, not to reach any particular line.” Here was the opportunity,
if unexpected, to begin a racial war. He continued: “Close your hearts to
mercy. Brutal action. Eighty million people must get their due. Their
existence must be secured. The stronger has the right.” Germany was
indeed much the stronger, in no small measure because of what Hitler
had acquired without war from Austria and Czechoslovakia in 1938.
The invasion of Poland came from all sides: on September 1 from the
north and west by German forces from Germany, from the south by
German forces from what had been Czechoslovakia with the assistance of
Slovak troops, and then on September 17 from the east by the Red Army.
German and Soviet forces met at Brest and organized a joint victory
parade, swastika followed by hammer and sickle, “Deutschland über
Alles” followed by the Internationale. The Soviet commander invited
German reporters to visit him in Moscow after the common “victory over
capitalist Albion.” Some of the German tanks admired on the streets of
Brest were likely of Czechoslovak production; some of the German
soldiers and SS men invading Poland were Austrian. German technical
superiority, which Hitler saw as racial superiority, was a fact. When the
German air force overflew the parade at Brest, its pilots were pausing
from their terror bombing of Polish towns and cities. Bombing civilians
was a tactic that Europeans generally saw as legitimate when used in
colonial possessions; it was now applied in Europe itself. Far more Jews
were killed in the German terror bombing of Warsaw in September 1939
than as a result of all prior German policies taken together in the six years
since Hitler had come to power. Likewise, the seven thousand Jewish
soldiers killed in action resisting the German invasion far outnumbered
the Jews who had been killed in Germany to that point.
The German invasion of Poland was undertaken on the logic that
Poland did not, had not, and could not exist as a sovereign state. Soldiers
taken prisoner could be shot, since the Polish army could not really have
existed as such. Once the campaign was over, what began was not an
occupation, since by Nazi logic there was no prior polity whose territory
could be occupied. Poland was a geographic designation meaning land to
be taken. German international lawyers contended that Poland was not a
state, but merely a place without a legitimate sovereign over which the
Germans found themselves masters. Polish law was declared null and
void—indeed, never to have existed. This state of affairs was based upon

the simple will of the Führer; once war was under way this sufficed for
important dispensations beyond the borders of prewar Germany. The
true Nazi revolution had begun.
—
The nullification of statehood and law was no technicality, but rather a
matter of life and death. Traditionally, European states understood one
another’s regimes as legitimate. Even when they were at war, they
recognized one another’s existence and the distinctiveness of one
another’s constitutional traditions. Citizenship is meaningful only when
recognized reciprocally; Hitler was destroying the principle of citizenship
when he destroyed a neighboring civitas, moving Germany along with
Europe towards lawlessness. Germany was treating Poland as European
states in their most destructive moments treated settler colonies: as a bit
of earth inhabited by ungoverned and undefined beings. SS publications
described Poland, a country where more than thirty million people lived,
as “virgin territory.” Italians quickly got the message, comparing Poland
to Ethiopia, their own African conquest.
Coordinating this utopian colonial image with twentieth-century
political reality in the middle of Europe required not just the subjugation
of people, but also the destruction of the institutions that were, in fact,
present. The bulk of Germany’s imperial work in Poland would involve
not so much the creation of something new, as the removal of what was
actually there. Restoring the law of the jungle in a country where forests
had been cleared a thousand years earlier would require an enormous
amount of work.
The destruction of the Polish state was achieved in both ink and blood.
As the lawyers worked their typewriters, the murderers worked their
guns. Hitler called for a “massive extermination of the Polish
intelligentsia.” Insofar as Polish culture existed at all, thought Hitler, it
would disappear with the physical elimination of its relatively few
“bearers.” Hitler foresaw a “resolution of the Polish problem” by the
murder of those who might be regarded as fully human. The invasion of
Poland gave the state destroyers of the SS the cover of war for their
lawless mission. Heydrich organized the Einsatzgruppen, task forces of
policemen and SS members usually led by party and SS members of long

standing. He instructed his subordinates to murder the Polish leading
classes in order to render Polish resistance impossible. Thus, for example,
all veterans of the Polish Legions and the Polish Military Organization
were to be found and killed. The major operation of the Einsatzgruppen
was known as Tannenberg, the plan to murder some sixty-one thousand
Polish citizens.
The Einsatzgruppen killed about as many people as expected in Poland
in autumn 1939, although they were at first inept in the actual tracking of
particular individuals. Nevertheless, they kept up the killing of targeted
groups after military operations concluded in October and as they
established themselves in Polish cities as the stationary German police.
Heydrich expected the “liquidation of leading Poles” to be complete by
November. When the shooting of tens of thousands of Poles in 1939
seemed not to suffice, further “leadership elements” were identified in
order to be “liquidated” in mass shootings in forests outside the major
cities in spring 1940. Heydrich imagined that the killing of the elites
would leave the Poles as a mass of laborers. Himmler predicted that the
very idea of a Polish nation would disappear.
—
The first thrust of the German offensive—military, political, and racial—
was directed against Poland as a political entity rather than against its
Jewish citizens. But the destruction of the Polish state had the greatest
consequences for Poland’s Jews. Minorities depend the most on the
protection of the state and upon the rule of law, and it is usually they who
suffer most from anarchy and war. The Jews of Poland, to be sure, had to
fear official and popular antisemitism in Poland in the late 1930s. Yet
they had much more to lose than other Polish citizens from the
destruction of Poland. The annihilation of the Polish state by Nazi power
was not a simple disappearance, but rather a shattering of existing
institutions, and the resulting fragments had sharp, cutting edges.
The first fragmentation was that of national authority. The GermanSoviet Treaty on Borders and Friendship of September 1939 spoke of “the
collapse of the Polish state”; subsequent German legal language denied
that there had ever been a Polish state. All at once Jews were no longer
citizens of anything. For that matter, neither were Poles, Ukrainians,

Belarusians, or anyone else with Polish documents (except members of
the German minority, who were suddenly privileged). Much of the subject
population adapted immediately to German racial expectations. The
moment the Germans entered Polish cities to allocate food, some Poles
pointed out the Jews waiting in line so that Poles would get more and
Jews less (or nothing). Racism and materialism were intertwined right
from the beginning. With the principle of citizenship abolished and the
principle of race established, no one wanted to be treated worse than the
Jews.

Much of Poland’s west was annexed to the Reich—or, officially, de-

annexed back to the Reich. The new German districts drawn from Polish
territories, the new Gaue, were governed by Hitler’s cronies, old Nazi
party men. These leaders had much more freedom of action than their
colleagues in the prewar German districts, who always had to deal with
the burdens of law and bureaucracy. The largest and most important of
the new Gaue was the Warthegau, home to 4.2 million Poles, 435,000
Jews, and only 325,000 Germans. This was a new kind of German
district. Prewar Germany was overwhelmingly German; here Germans
were a colonial elite and the majority population were “protected
subjects.” Polish children, for example, were to be taught a pidgin
German in school, so that they would be distinguishable as racial
inferiors but capable of taking orders from Germans. Much of central
Poland was transformed into a colony known as the “General
Government.” It was initially called the “General Government of the
Occupied Polish Lands,” but this qualification was dropped because of its
suggestion that Poland had once existed. According to Nazi logic there
was no occupation, but rather a colonization of legally “empty” territory.
The degree of freedom was even greater here than in the new Gaue, since
there was not even the pretense of German law.
In the annexed zones and in the General Government, Polish civil law
was replaced by anti-Jewish repression, which accelerated at a pace
impossible in prewar Germany. In October 1939, the Germans seized “the
property of the former Polish state” and all Jewish property. Jews were
banned from practicing professions, and Jewish males were required to
report for labor. Jews lost the right to remain where they were. Both
Heydrich and the new governor-general Hans Frank ordered
ghettoization of Polish Jews. This proceeded differently in different
regions; by the end of 1941 most Polish Jews were behind the walls of a
ghetto. Crucial everywhere was the simple assumption that Jews could be
separated from the protection of the law: They had no power to decide
where their bodies would be, and no claim to possessions. Beginning in
Poland, the Germans would establish ghettos in every country where they
attempted to destroy a state, and in no country where they carried out a
conventional occupation. The ghetto was the urban expression of state
destruction.
The creation of ghettos in the cities meant a basic transformation of the
Polish landscape. Jews, who had been almost everywhere in prewar

Poland, were now concentrated in a small number of urban
neighborhoods. This made possible the theft by Germans of all of the
Jewish property that they could take (as well as the rape of Jewish girls
and women). The signal to the surrounding population was
unambiguous. Jews had often been beyond the world of moral concern in
interwar Poland; now they were beyond the reach of law and indeed the
ambit of daily life. By the time ghettos were established and Jews
deported to them, their Polish neighbors had been pauperized by German
rule for about a year. This presumably made Poles more likely to steal
from Jews when the opportunity arose. As was the case everywhere,
people in Poland tended to hate those from whom they stole because they
had stolen from them.
For most Poles, the ghettoizations of 1940 and 1941 were the moment
when Jews disappeared from their lives. Hundreds of years of mixed
settlement were suddenly over, from one day to the next. Jews, once seen
every day in every setting, were now seen only in work columns or
through walls—or, very rarely, in hiding. Their houses in the villages and
their apartments in the city were there for the taking. The traditionally
Jewish vocations, in commerce and the professions, would now be
performed by others. German occupation obviously did not mean social
advancement for Poles as such, since educated Poles were killed and the
rest were treated as a mute proletariat. Poles in the General Government
were seized on the streets and sent to camps as forced labor. All of this
created a setting of relative deprivation, wherein many Poles found it
acceptable to seize what they could from Jews as the Jews disappeared.
Polish theft of Jewish property did not make Poles allies of the Germans,
but it did make them seek to justify what they had done and tend to
support any policy that kept the Jews from regaining what had been
theirs. In any event, helping Jews who left the ghettos was punishable by
death in the General Government.
The second fragmentation brought by the German destruction of the
Polish state was that of local authority, both that of the prewar village
and county administrations and the prewar Jewish autonomous bodies.
The Polish central government was destroyed, Polish law was abolished,
and the Polish state was declared never to have existed. Polish local
authorities did remain in place, but were now unmoored from prior law
and tradition. Removed from the previous institutional hierarchy by

German practice, their function was fundamentally altered by Nazi
priorities. They no longer executed orders from central ministries or
represented the interests of local citizens. There were no longer
ministries and there were no longer citizens. Instead, local authorities
were made personally responsible for the implementation of German
racial policies. They oversaw the deportations of Poland’s Jews to ghettos
and the distribution of property not taken by the Germans.
The Jews sent to the ghettos were met there by a melancholy parody of
interwar Jewish authorities: the Judenrat, established by order of
Governor-General Frank in November 1939. Under Piłsudski, Poland’s
Jews had been allowed to choose local self-governing authorities, known
as kehillot or gminy. These bodies took responsibility for matters of
religion, marriage, burial, ritual slaughter, and in some measure for social
welfare and education. Jewish communal authorities were authorized to
receive money from abroad to fund these activities. Under the Germans,
these local authorities, generally the same people, became the Judenrat,
responsible for the execution of German orders. They were in no
reciprocal relationship with the Polish state, which no longer existed, and
were henceforth prevented from maintaining connections with other
Jewish communities around the world. It was simplest for Germans just
to take the kehilla as it was, just as it was simplest to take the Polish local
mayors and county commissioners as they were. What was usually
decisive was the destruction of the Polish state and the character of
German policy, not the character of these individuals. Those who did
leave could always be replaced by others.
New Jewish police forces, armed with clubs, were technically
subordinate to the Judenräte, but in the crucial cases took orders from
the Germans. The head of the two-thousand-strong Jewish police in the
Warsaw ghetto was Józef Szeryński, who had served in the Polish police
before the war. Young Jewish men from Betar, who had been trained in
the use of weapons by the Polish state, also showed a certain inclination
to join the Jewish police. Often Jewish policemen tried to resolve strife
between Jews to prevent any recourse to German authority. From 1940,
the Jewish police oversaw the mandatory labor required of all Jews. From
1941, they rounded up their fellow Jews for deportations from ghettos to
labor camps; in 1942, to death facilities. The Jewish informers who
offered their services to the Germans tended to be people who had a

record as informers for the prewar Polish police. Naturally, they were
now informing about different things.
The third fragmentation of the Polish state was the separation of a
once-centralized institution from the shattered hierarchy: the Polish
police. The regular Polish police had been a hierarchically organized
institution subordinate to the Ministry of Internal Affairs. In the 1930s
the Polish police were instrumental in defending Jewish life, commerce,
and politics. Jewish tradesmen maintained friendly relationships, often
by way of bribes, with the policemen charged with protecting town
markets. The Polish police sometimes sided with Poles in fights between
Poles and Jews, although Polish nationalists complained that policemen
sided with Betar. Polish judges often found Jews guilty of provoking the
violence that was directed against them. Yet on the whole, the Polish
police were expected to prevent pogroms, and generally did so. In the
Poland of the 1930s, a pogrom was a violation of public property and an
attempt to demonstrate the weakness of the state. Most policemen,
regardless of their views about Jews, understood their duties to the
bourgeois order.
Then that order changed. A conventional state that sought to
monopolize violence was destroyed by a racial regime that sought to
channel anarchy. When the Polish state was destroyed in September
1939, its policemen no longer had superiors to instruct them. The highest
authorities of the Polish state evacuated Warsaw, leaving policemen to
decide their own course. It cannot be said that Polish policemen then
sided with the Germans. Many policemen from throughout Poland chose
to gather in Warsaw and fight the Germans as the Polish capital was
besieged. After the capitulation, they faced the classical dilemma of forces
of order. To leave their posts would provoke chaos and crime. To stay
meant working for a foreign invader. Most Polish policemen chose the
latter. The German Order Police then racialized the units that became the
subordinate Polish Order Police (known as the Blue Police): Jews could
not return to duty, and Poles could not arrest Germans. Whereas
Germans were not usually punished for refusing orders to shoot civilians,
Polish policemen could be shot. The Polish policemen were subordinated
to a German structure that they could not at first hope to understand: to
the German Order Police, which meant ultimately to Himmler. In coming
years, some thirty thousand German Order Policemen would take part in

the murder of Jews in Poland. The Polish police became, with time, a
subordinate part of the German apparatus of racial war.
—
The Polish state was to be destroyed because in 1939 Hitler was angry
and impatient and had no better way of approaching the Soviet border
than by obliterating the country that lay between. Hitler was equipped by
ideology to envision the destruction of states in the name of nature and
had at his disposal an imposing army and special task forces whose
essential mission was the destruction of institutions to permit racial war.
The SS and the Einsatzgruppen first killed on a large scale in Poland—but
their main target was Polish elites, not Jews.
Jews, not seen as a race, were to be removed from the habitat entirely.
The new German lawlessness took its most striking form in the expulsion
of Jews from their homes to ghettos in the cities. For the Germans, the
ghettos were holding tanks where Jews were concentrated before
deportation to some exotic place where nature would take its course. In
the overpopulated ghettos, deaths outnumbered births by a factor of ten.
Most of the people who died in the first months were Jews who had been
deported from the countryside or from other towns and had few or no
possessions and connections. The big ghettos, such as Warsaw, took on a
kind of colonial appearance, as rickshaws replaced automobiles (stolen by
the Germans) and the streetcar service (restricted by the Germans). The
luster of subjugation attracted German tourists, who often returned home
with a pleasant sense of imperial mastery. The problem for those
responsible in Berlin was that there was no actual overseas colony to
which Jews could be deported.
The Nazi racial policy of 1939 and 1940, the purification of the
conquered Polish territories, was a cruel shambles. Himmler was given
broad powers as a kind of racial commissar on October 7, 1939. His best
idea was to deport Jews and Poles from the Polish territories annexed to
Germany to the General Government. Even if this had somehow
succeeded, which it did not, it would merely have displaced the racial
enemies a short distance to the east. The vast number of Poles in the
annexed territories made the scheme dystopian. In the territories
annexed to the Reich, Poles outnumbered Germans about twenty to one,

and even Jews slightly outnumbered Germans. The city of Łódź,
incorporated into Nazi Germany, became, by population, its largest
Jewish and its largest Polish city.
In practice, Himmler deported Poles first. They were regarded as the
pertinent political enemy, and their farms could be given to Germans who
were arriving from territories that the Soviet Union had invaded. Some
87,883 people were deported from the annexed territories in December
1939 and another 40,128 early the next year, most of them Poles. These
numbers signify a vast amount of human suffering but hardly altered the
demographic balance. The transport of Jews from the Reich to the
General Government was pointless in conception and unachieved in
practice. It was very exciting, however, to some Germans on the territory
of the prewar Reich, who began to lobby for the deportation of Jews from
their localities. Heydrich had to stop such local initiatives in December
1939. It was then, in January 1940, that Heydrich’s subordinate
Eichmann made an approach to Stalin: Perhaps the Soviet Union would
be willing to take two million Jews from German-occupied Poland? Stalin
was not interested in admitting masses of unscreened people to the
USSR; receiving Jews seems to have been one of the few Nazi requests he
declined during the period of his alliance with Hitler.
The ghettos became a holding pen for a much more ambitious
deportation plan: the evacuation of Jews to Madagascar. This was the
black hole for Jews that had received the most attention in Germany and
throughout Europe before the war. It was the solution that Hitler had
suggested to Polish leaders in 1938, who could not understand how he
meant to combine it with war. A victory over France, German leaders
hoped, would open up Madagascar, which was a French colonial
possession. Having defeated Poland, Hitler returned to his basic scenario
for the war: remove the French threat from the west to avoid the strategic
problem of encirclement, and then attack the Soviet Union to achieve the
war’s aim, Lebensraum. After German troops entered Paris on June 14,
1940, Eichmann sent an envoy to look for the documentation of the 1936
Polish-French discussions about Madagascar. The new French
government established in Vichy supported a Madagascar deportation.
But shipping millions of people from Europe to the Indian Ocean was a
project that would require the approval, and indeed the support, of the
British Empire. When France fell, Britain remained in the war.

This was the latest surprise for Hitler, who was wrong about a number
of strategic predictions. The western allies were supposed to defend
Czechoslovakia but did not; Poland was not supposed to fight but it did;
France was supposed to fight longer than it did; Britain was supposed to
see the logic of peace if France fell but did not. Winston Churchill, who
had succeeded Chamberlain as prime minister, was defiance itself. On
July 10, 1940, Hitler began an air war with Britain, and expressed the
conviction that the defeat of Britain would remove the final barrier to the
Madagascar plan. But he was in no position to defeat the United
Kingdom. The German air force was outfought by the British, who
commissioned skilled Polish and Czech pilots. The German navy was too
small to mount a serious amphibious assault on the British coast. Like so
much else, the invasion had not really been thought through. An outline
for a Madagascar deportation was already out of date when completed in
August 1940, since by then Hitler had abandoned any intention to occupy
Great Britain.
When Hitler understood that Madagascar was impossible, his thoughts
turned back to the Soviet Union. On July 31, 1940, just three weeks after
he had begun his halfhearted British campaign, he asked his generals to
review plans for the invasion of the Soviet Union. The war against the
USSR would make sense, he reminded his generals, only if Germany
could “smash the state” and that “in one blow.” In December, he issued
the formal directive for the submission of war plans to “crush Soviet
Russia in a rapid campaign.”
Thus the black hole for the Jews migrated from one obscure and exotic
imperial locale to another, from the tropical maritime south to the frozen
tundra of the north. Hitler imagined that the Soviet state would be
crushed in a few weeks, and that its Jews, and perhaps other Jews as well,
could then be dispatched to Siberia. About this, too, he was mistaken. But
erring was an essential part of Nazi logic. The Führer could never be
wrong; only the world could be wrong; and when it was, the fault would
be borne by the Jews.
—
Nazi strategic predictions about the behavior of particular states were
often mistaken, but the Nazis were learning a lesson about what

happened in general when states were destroyed. Indeed,
misunderstandings of neighboring peoples forced unexpected campaigns
to destroy states, which, in turn, opened a realm of experimentation. The
annexation of Austria accelerated the deportation of Jews, the invasion of
Poland created a new opportunity for their ghettoization, and then the
war of annihilation against the Soviet Union would permit a Final
Solution. It was not a Final Solution of the type that had been considered,
a deportation to some obscure and distant place seized from another
empire. It was a Final Solution of mass murder, in the Jewish homeland
itself, in eastern Europe.
The three million German men assembled to invade the Soviet Union
in June 1941 found themselves in Polish territories that had been
colonized and terrorized. The Poland these three million German soldiers
saw had been utterly transformed, its Jews humiliated and ghettoized,
the rest of its population subjected to an improvised anarchy of
exploitation. When these three million men crossed the German-Soviet
border on the twenty-second of that month, they first set foot in a very
special zone: the territories that Germany had granted to the Soviet
Union in September 1939. The German invasion of the Soviet Union thus
began as a reinvasion of territories that had just been invaded. The
German attack on the Soviet Union meant destroying a state apparatus,
the new Soviet one, right after the Soviets had destroyed another set of
state apparatuses, those of the independent states of the 1920s and
1930s. A double invasion by great powers would have been dramatic
enough, though not quite unprecedented.
Double state destruction of this kind was something entirely new.

5
Double Occupation

During the war, the gifted political thinker Hannah Arendt glimpsed what
was happening. A Jewish political emigrant from Germany, she
understood how National Socialist ideology could be realized. If Jews
were to be removed from the planet, they first had to be separated from
the state. As she wrote later, “one could do as one pleased only with
stateless people.”
Like succeeding historians of the Holocaust, and in accord with the
German Jewish experience she shared with some of them, she saw this
separation from the state as the gradual deprivation of rights. As she
observed, “the first essential step on the road to total domination is to kill
the juridical person in man.” Yet the easiest way to deprive a Jew of law
and to instruct non-Jews in lawlessness was to destroy entire
jurisdictions, as with Austria and Czechoslovakia. As Arendt came to
realize, the Jews “were threatened more than any other by the sudden
collapse of the system of nation states.” Above all, Jews were placed in
peril by the collapse of the states of which they were citizens. The war of
1939, the attack on Poland by Germany, brought new sorts of
depravations as the state was fragmented along new, colonial lines. But
even ghettoization and the proclamation of a colonial order were not
enough to precipitate a Holocaust. Something more was needed: a double
destruction of the state.
In 1939, when Hitler made his alliance with Stalin, he was undertaking
to destroy states by proxy. Hitler had a vivid idea of what Soviet rule
would mean for the places granted to Moscow by the German-Soviet
Treaty on Borders and Friendship: the Baltic states of Lithuania, Latvia,
and Estonia; and the eastern half of Poland. If anything, his notion of

Soviet terror was exaggerated: the total elimination of all thinking people,
the murder of tens of millions by starvation. Himmler wrote of the
“Bolshevik method” of the “physical extermination of a nation.” Hitler, in
making his alliance with the Soviet Union, was always planning to invade
the lands that he granted his ally. His invitation to Stalin in 1939 to
destroy states would precede his own campaign in the same lands to
follow in 1941. The German Führer was therefore contemplating the
double destruction of states: first the crushing of interwar nation-states
by Soviet techniques, seen as extraordinarily radical, and then the
elimination of newly created Soviet state apparatus by Nazi techniques,
still in the making.
Germans found the conditions where “one could do as one pleased,”
where they could kill Jews in large numbers for the first time, in 1941, as
they invaded the Soviet Union. It was in the zone of double occupation,
where Soviet rule preceded German, where the Soviet destruction of
interwar states was followed by the German annihilation of Soviet
institutions, that a Final Solution took shape. Almost all of the two
million or so Jews who came under German rule in 1939 would die. The
same was true of the two million Jews who came under Soviet rule in
1939 and 1940. Indeed, the Jews who initially fell under Soviet rule were
the first to be murdered en masse by the Germans.
—
When the Germans and the Soviets undertook their joint invasion of
Poland in September 1939, the Soviets were the senior partners in
political violence. The Soviet secret state police, the NKVD, had
experience in mass killing that was unrivalled by any German institution.
Some 681,692 Soviet citizens had been arrested, shot, and buried in pits
in the operations of the Great Terror of 1937–1938. The NKVD had shot
twice as many Poles on its own territory while preparing for war in those
years than the Einsatzgruppen shot when German forces actually
invaded Poland in 1939. In proportional terms the contrast is far greater.
The killing of 111,091 Soviet citizens in the Polish Operation of 1937–1938
changed the nationality structure of the western Soviet Union. A third of
the male Soviet Poles of military age were killed before the war in this and
other terror actions, their wives and children often sent to be

denationalized at concentration camps or orphanages. The Soviet
republics that bordered Poland, Soviet Ukraine and Soviet Belarus, lost a
considerable part of their Polish minority to murder and deportation:
some 59,903 people in Ukraine, some 61,501 people in Belarus.
Stalin’s rationale for the mass murder of Soviet citizens of Polish
nationality was not racial but ethnostrategic. At Stalin’s behest and under
his guidance, the NKVD used interrogations to develop a theory of a vast
Polish plot against the Soviet Union, directed by the Polish Military
Organization. This was entirely false. While veterans of the Polish
Military Organization were quite active in Polish military intelligence and
in the higher reaches of the state, the institution as such no longer
existed, and certainly not as assassins and saboteurs on Soviet territory.
The veterans of the Polish Military Organization, insofar as they were
plotting acts of conspiratorial violence in the late 1930s, were thinking of
the British in Palestine. By the end of the Great Terror, however, the
NKVD had assembled enough confessions by torture to compose a
fictional narrative in which even leaders of the Soviet state were secret
Polish agents. This proved to be quite risky for the NKVD itself. Since the
imagined conspiracy grew from week to week in 1937 and 1938, NKVD
commanders could always be charged with having neglected the Polish
danger in the past.
In 1938, Stalin was able to turn the Soviet communist party, an early
target of the purges, against the NKVD. When higher officers of the secret
state police were themselves arrested and killed, younger ones took their
places. As a consequence, the nationality structure of the NKVD was
altered. It was no longer an exceptionally cosmopolitan elite with
revolutionary prestige in which Jews (and Latvians and Poles) were
highly represented. Polish officers were removed and often executed in
the Polish Operation. Then the entire NKVD was purged: first for not
being vigilant enough, then for being too vigilant. By the end of 1938, the
NKVD had become an organization dominated by Russians (65 percent of
high officers) and Ukrainians (17 percent of high officers). Russians were
now overrepresented in the NKVD by comparison to their share in the
general Soviet population. The percentage of Jews was down from nearly
forty percent to less than four percent. There were no longer any Poles at
all.
It was this NKVD, experienced in murder, humbled by Stalin, and

russified, that was turned against Polish institutions and elites after the
Soviet invasion of eastern Poland of September 17, 1939. An actual
assault on potential resisters in eastern Poland was a much safer
assignment for the NKVD than the Polish Operation inside the Soviet
Union had been, since real enemies could be found among the Polish
citizenry, and real progress could be reported. The collapse of Poland
brought by German and Soviet arms generated real chaos that could
demonstrably be mastered. In eastern Poland, Soviet soldiers beat men to
death for their gold teeth and raped women in the knowledge that this
would be dismissed as “children playing a little.” Soviet invasion meant
local uprisings by native communists, who often robbed and killed Poles
who had been in authority, and by native nationalists, who often believed
Soviet propaganda about national freedom to the east and national
liberation by the Red Army. It meant attacks upon Polish officials and
landowners, the score settling that is always to be expected when regimes
change with sudden violence.
Against this backdrop the Soviet NKVD could bring to occupied eastern
Poland calm and order of a certain sort. Unlike members of the
Einsatzgruppen, who in 1939 were killing for the first time and who did
so to create the conditions for a German racial triumph, NKVD officers
were experienced administrators of life and death whose task was to
establish the basis of a certain model of statehood. NKVD officers,
generally Russians and Ukrainians, were transferred in large numbers to
the newly conquered eastern Polish territories in late 1939. Over the
course of 1940, the majority of arrests and imprisonments in the entire
Soviet Union was made in occupied eastern Poland, a tiny percentage of
Soviet territory. The typical sentence was eight years in the Gulag; some
8,513 people were sentenced to death in individual cases.
Unlike the Germans, the Soviets had mechanisms for and experience
with large-scale deportations. Rather than colonial fantasies, they had
time-tested destinations: the vast network of prison camps and special
settlements known as the Gulag. Soviet internal colonization was
inscribed in tundra and steppe. On December 5, 1939, Stalin ordered
preparations for a first wave of deportations, to target the Polish state
apparatus and its influential supporters. Some 139,794 people were
accordingly forced from their homes onto trains and sent to the Gulag,
usually to Soviet Kazakhstan, in February 1940. Polish Jews were

deported as capitalists to the Gulag in large numbers in April 1940 and
then still larger numbers in June 1940 for expressing the desire to retain
their Polish citizenship. In the months after the Soviet invasion, some
292,513 Polish citizens were deported to the Gulag in four major waves,
along with perhaps another two hundred thousand in smaller actions or
after individual arrests. In these four large actions, almost 60 percent of
the victims were Poles (who were about 40 percent of the population in
eastern Poland), just over 20 percent Jews (8 percent of the population),
about 10 percent Ukrainians (about 35 percent of the population), and
about 8 percent Belarusians (8 percent of the population).

One of the individuals who was apprehended and sentenced to the
Gulag was a young writer from Kielce, Gustaw Herling-Grudziński. The

accusation leveled against him by Soviet authorities was that he had
illegally left Poland for Lithuania to fight against the USSR. He politely
asked his interrogators to alter the charge to indicate that he had
intended leaving Poland to fight against the Germans. They assured him
that it amounted to the same thing. Herling later provided one of the
most powerful accounts of life in a Soviet concentration camp, where
hard-won solitude is the only substitute for impossible freedom, and
where a personality integrated under entirely different conditions can be
disassembled into its component parts. “There,” in the Gulag, “it has been
proved that when the body has reached the limit of its endurance, one
cannot, as was once believed, rely on strength of character and conscious
recognition of spiritual values; there is nothing, in fact, which man
cannot be forced to do by hunger and pain.” Herling became convinced
“that a man can only be human under human conditions.”
From the Soviet perspective the most dangerous Polish group was the
officer class. It represented a threefold threat: It was the leadership of an
enemy army; some of its senior officers were veterans of campaigns
against the USSR; and its reserve officers represented the Polish educated
classes. The Soviets saw the Polish educated classes as the basis for the
Polish political nation. The immediate aim of the arrest and elimination
of such people was to make political resistance more difficult. The officers
of the Polish army who surrendered or were captured were placed in
camps, where they were investigated and interrogated individually. Then
NKVD director Lavrentii Beria sent a troika that judged the group
collectively. “Each one of them,” wrote Beria to Stalin, “is waiting to be
released in order to be able to enter actively into the battle against Soviet
power.” He recommended “the supreme punishment—shooting.” Stalin
approved.
In April 1940, some 21,892 Polish officers and other Polish citizens
were shot by NKVD officers in the Katyn Forest and at four other sites.
Because the Polish army was an instrument of social mobility, many of
the victims, about forty percent, were from peasant and working-class
backgrounds. Because the Polish officer class was multinational, many of
the victims were members of national minorities, including Jews. Henryk
Strasman, a member of Irgun, was among those killed by a bullet at the
base of the neck and buried in a mass grave at Katyn. Wilhelm
Engelkreis, a doctor and reserve officer, was also murdered at Katyn. His

daughter, writing later from Israel, recalled her childhood despair at the
loss of her father. Hironim Brandwajn, a doctor, was murdered at Katyn;
his wife, Mira, died two years later in the Warsaw ghetto without knowing
what had happened to her husband. Mieczysław Proner was a pharmacist
and a chemist and a Jew and a Pole and a reserve officer and a
combatant. He fought against the Germans in the Polish army, only to be
arrested by the Soviets and murdered in the same action. A few months
later his mother was ordered to the Warsaw ghetto; two years later she
was deported to Treblinka and gassed.
With one exception, the 21,892 people murdered by the NKVD were
men. Many of them, like these Polish Jews, had families in the German
occupation zone, who now faced German repressions without heads of
household. Since the Soviets were killing the same kinds of Polish citizens
as the Germans—the educated elite—they were making the German task
easier. When the families of the murdered officers were in the Soviet
zone, the NKVD deported them to the Gulag. Surprised by a knock on the
door, these people almost never escaped. One of the rare exceptions was
the wife of a Polish officer who left her children with a trusted Jewish
neighbor. But this was a rather isolated example of a failure of the NKVD.
These Soviet deportations of 1940 repeated, on a smaller scale, the
methods of the Great Terror. In the Polish Operation, Polish men had
been shot and the families deported to be exploited and denationalized.
There was also continuity of personnel: Vasily Blokhin, one of the
executioners of the Polish officers, had killed thousands of Soviet citizens
during the Great Terror. Wearing a leather cap, apron, and gloves to the
elbows, Blokhin personally shot about two hundred and fifty men each
night. In the Soviet system, the number of executioners was very small,
and they were officers. They followed clear written orders issued within a
strict hierarchy. The Soviet system included within itself legal states of
exception, which, once they had been used to justify the special measures
needed for mass terror, could be terminated. In the German system, as it
developed, innovations from below met wishes from above, orders were
often unclear, and the officers tried to devolve the responsibility for the
actual shooting to their men, or indeed to non-Germans who happened to
be in the vicinity. The Soviet system was, therefore, much more precise
and efficient in its campaigns of murder. But the German system was
more efficient in creating large numbers of executioners.

The Soviets, at least some of them, believed in what they were doing.
After all, they did it themselves and recorded what they did, in clear
language, in official documents, filed in orderly archives. They could
associate themselves with their deeds, because true responsibility rested
with the communist party. The Nazis used grand phrases of racial
superiority, and Himmler spoke of the moral sublimity involved in killing
others for the sake of the race. But when the time came, Germans acted
without plans and without precision, and with no sense of responsibility.
In the Nazi worldview, what happened was simply what happened, the
stronger should win; but nothing was certain, and certainly not the
relationship between past, present, and future. The Soviets believed that
History was on their side and acted accordingly. The Nazis were afraid of
everything except the disorder they themselves created. The systems and
the mentalities were different, profoundly and interestingly so.
Yet the two regimes acted in the same time and place. Whatever the
Soviets did, and with whatever motives, they were doing to people who, if
not killed or deported, would then face the Nazis and their methods. The
damage that the NKVD inflicted was a matter of the deportation or death
of human beings, and of the disruption of lives and the alteration of
spirits. It was very important that the Soviets destroyed the Polish state
in their half of Poland; it was very important that they physically removed
those who were associated with Polish statehood. Yet perhaps most
important was the way Soviet policies influenced those who survived and
remained: these citizens of annihilated states, these new Soviet citizens,
these people who would confront the Wehrmacht and the SS in 1941.
—
Like the Nazis, the Soviets began from the assumption that the Polish
state created in 1918 had no right to exist and so could be eliminated by
decree and then mocked. But the form of the mockery was tellingly
different. The Soviets, like the Germans, destroyed Polish state symbols,
but on the logic that they represented a “bourgeois,” “reactionary,”
“white,” or “fascist” Poland. The problem with the Polish state, in the
Soviet view, was that it was a creation of the upper classes. This was very
different from the Nazi view, which was that lower races such as the Poles
did not deserve a political existence.

In western and central Poland, occupied by Nazi Germany, the higher
Polish officials were hunted down, imprisoned in camps, and often killed,
whereas the lower-level officials, such as the mayors, county
commissioners, and village heads, were expected to follow new kinds of
orders from German authorities. As Hans Frank, the head of the German
colony known as the General Government, described the task: “The
leadership elements we have now identified in Poland are what is to be
liquidated.” This was race war: extermination of the vital racial forces of
the enemy, and then the exploitation of its lower elements.
An empire on Nazi principles required an open subordination of
inferior races, and thus an extravagantly visible difference between the
political existence of Germans and that of others. Soviet empire involved
the territorial extension of the Soviet Union as it already was. In eastern
Poland, occupied by the Soviet Union, higher Polish officials were treated
much as they were in the German zone. But, for a time at least, their place
was taken by people of humble social origins or even by imprisoned
members of local communist parties. In one town after another, the
political prisoners became the local authorities. This was a temporary but
important phase in the change of regime, since it transferred the
appearance of the responsibility for the Soviet revolution to local people.
Some Polish citizens were thus implicated in Soviet-style class warfare:
the decapitation of the bourgeois or feudal leadership of the enemy, the
promotion of workers and peasants, and then the subordination of
everyone to a larger order that proclaimed its own egalitarianism.
The Soviet decapitation of society was accompanied by a zombification
of the social body. The Soviets took the possibility of Polish resistance
much more seriously than the Germans did, since for them it represented
one instance of the formidable power of international capitalism rather
than the last gasps of a suffocating race. The NKVD applied far more
sophisticated methods than the German Gestapo, usually observing
resistance groups, arresting and recruiting their members one by one,
and slowly trying to break the whole organization or, ideally, turn it to the
Soviet side without its members realizing what was happening. Since
resistance was for the Soviets by definition part of an international plot,
the Soviet hope was always to follow the links from the Polish
underground back to the Polish government-in-exile and to its British
and French allies. In practice, Soviet rule meant the cultivation of

distrust, as Polish citizens ready for conspiratorial work became unsure
of one another and incapable of discerning which underground groups
were legitimate and which were fronts for the NKVD. Thus equality in the
Soviet sense emerged in occupied eastern Poland: Polish citizens learned
to distrust one another equally. Everyone became a potential traitor, and
appearances were not to be believed. This new reality undermined the old
in a matter of weeks.
Whereas Germans excluded Polish citizens from participation in their
new order, the Soviets forced Polish citizens to take part in Soviet
political rituals, presented as exercises in liberation. The Soviets
introduced their own version of democracy, in which participation was
open and mandatory, and voters had no alternatives. On October 22,
1939, inhabitants of what had been eastern Poland were called upon to
elect their representatives to national assemblies. In the Soviet zone of
occupation, Poles were the largest national group, but not a majority.
Ukrainians were a majority in the south, Belarusians in the north, and
Jews were numerous everywhere. The Soviet notion was to divide most of
the occupied lands between a Ukrainian zone in the south and a
Belarusian zone in the north, which would then be attached to the
existing Soviet Ukrainian and Soviet Belarusian republics. This is indeed
what transpired.
After the obligatory, humiliating, and falsified vote, the national
assemblies, meeting in the first days of November 1939, proclaimed the
desire that their lands be incorporated into the Soviet Union. This opened
the way for Soviet citizenship to be extended to all inhabitants of eastern
Poland, a symbolic expression of equality that would have been
unthinkable in the Nazi empire. Of course, it also opened the way for the
arrival of thousands of Soviet officials from further east, mostly Russians
and Ukrainians, who would hold the real power. Local people, usually
communists and members of the Ukrainian, Belarusian, and Jewish
minorities, had been useful as ostensible self-liberators. But their
liberation simply meant inclusion in a powerful system with its own
priorities, one of which was maintaining the alliance with Nazi Germany.
To take one striking example: Jewish butchers lost ownership of their
slaughterhouses and found themselves, as Soviet state employees,
packing meat for the German troops fighting against the western
democracies.

The Soviets behaved as if eastern Poland had been joined to their
homeland of socialism forever. Of course, this would not be the case,
since the leaders of Nazi Germany, the Soviet ally that allowed the new
disposition of territory, were intending to attack the Soviet Union at the
first opportunity. Stalin expected Hitler’s betrayal, but believed in 1939,
1940, and even 1941 that his ally could be placated with outspoken loyalty
and regular deliveries of goods. Thus the Soviet Union supplied Germany
not only with security in the east but also with some of the physical
resources used to fight the wars in western Europe in 1940: the oil, the
minerals, the grain. The Royal Air Force proposed to bomb Soviet
airfields as a way to slow Hitler’s advance through western Europe. The
peasants in Soviet Ukraine sang:
Ukraine is fertile
She gives her grain to the Germans
And she herself goes hungry.
—
In its newly acquired lands, the Soviet Union created material,
psychological, and political resources for the Germans, openings for
future Nazi power in eastern Europe that had not existed before 1939.
Though the Soviets did not intend to create these resources, their
availability was decisive for the course of events after the Germans
invaded these lands. This was true in eastern Poland in 1939 and would
be all the more true in the Baltic states after their occupation and
annexation by the Soviet Union in summer 1940.
In putting an end to capitalism, the Soviets created a material
resource. From the Soviet perspective the goal was equality, but
equalization means losses for some and gains for others. Even before the
Red Army arrived, local “communists went mad, carrying out revisions by
night and robbing and killing Poles.” Joel Cygielman, a Jew fleeing the
German invasion in his own automobile, lost it to a Soviet officer who
threatened him with a grenade. In Kovel, Jews who greeted the Red Army
with flowers found that the soldiers were interested only in what was in
their shops. Soviet soldiers at first stole what they could and then bought
what remained on the strength of an overvalued ruble. Local communists

placed in positions of authority used the pretext of arms searches to rob
their neighbors.
The end of the Polish civil code was experienced by most people as the
legalization of theft. If property could be taken by the state, perhaps it
was permissible to take it back again. The lack of legal assurances to
property made those who claimed new land or residences believe that
they themselves had to make sure that the previous owners never came
back. Jews had the most urban property to lose, and usually lost it: in the
double sense of the nationalization of their goods and the deportation of
their persons to Soviet Kazakhstan. The Soviet Union did not
discriminate against Jews as such; it was an anti-antisemitic entity that
criminalized ethnic discrimination. Given the social structure of the
market economy in eastern Poland, however, Soviet measures against
capitalism affected Jews more than others. To be sure, eastern Poland
was generally a very poor territory, although its society was far more
prosperous than that of the Soviet Union to which it was to be leveled.
Mendel Szef, a dairyman from Łuck, put matters this way: “after the
occupation of our country, it was said that all are equal, rich and poor,
but it turned out that all are poor, since the rich were arrested and sent to
the depths of Russia.”
The massive scale of Soviet deportations and executions permitted a
social revolution in both the countryside and the towns, as people
scrambled for the tens of thousands of suddenly empty farms and homes.
In the countryside of eastern Poland, where rural unemployment
exceeded fifty percent in the 1930s, people were hungry for land. Not
everyone took land from their neighbors, but many did. Here, as in all
such cases, peasants knew that if they did not take a vacant farmstead,
someone else would. Some Ukrainian peasants who refused to claim land
from deported Polish neighbors were forced to do so at gunpoint. In
many towns most of the good stone houses were owned by Jews, who
were often deported to the Gulag. For their neighbors in wooden huts or
hovels, a move to the center of town and residence in a stone house were
the peak of imaginable social advancement. The Soviets did not
expropriate Jews as a racial group. Even so, the fact of the prior
expropriation of a large number of Jews created an opportunity, if an
unexpected one, for the Germans who would later arrive. When Soviet
power was replaced by German, non-Jews could try to get their property

back, but Jews could not. The property that Jews had already lost could
be claimed by others. The initial Soviet expropriations, swift and
systematic, were racialized by the subsequent German arrival.
Most Jews in eastern Poland were of very humble means. Nevertheless,
Jews provided the connection between peasants and markets,
countryside and city. In other words, much of what Soviet officials would
see as speculation, profiteering, and the like was commercial activity
usually carried out by Jews. In Poland’s Volhynia district, for example, 75
percent of the registered traders (14,587 of the 19,337) were Jews. The
radical devaluation of the Polish currency and then its abolition in
December 1939 destroyed the social position of Jews who had some
savings or investments. The end of debts denominated in Polish currency
was a relief for many but a burden upon Jewish lenders and, indeed, the
removal of their source of authority in communities. The ceaseless Soviet
propaganda against commerce as such was, in fact though not in
intention, directed against Jews, and weakened their standing.
—
In altering the character of politics, the Soviets created a psychological
resource. Jews were given the appearance but not the reality of power.
After the arrival of the Red Army in September 1939, local Jews appeared
in visible positions of responsibility in greater numbers than had ever
been the case between the wars. The Polish central government had acted
to make sure that even towns with a Jewish majority did not have a
majority of Jews on the city council. Although there were a few Jews in
the Polish police and the Polish administration generally, the tendency
was to keep those numbers low. The change in autumn 1939 was,
therefore, experienced as dramatic. The Soviets had no particular desire
to promote Jews as such, although a few commanders and officials
opined that Jews were more reliable than Poles. Still, Jews were among
those who were available and exhibited the willingness and skills to take
up new positions. Jews were never the majority of local collaborators
with the Soviet regime; Belarusians and Ukrainians were overall far more
numerous. Local Jews never held real power, with the exception of a few
weeks in autumn 1939, and that on a very local scale, and alongside other,
non-Jewish, collaborators. Nevertheless, the change of regime made Jews

collectively vulnerable. When the Germans invaded, the actual
administrators of the new Soviet territory, the Soviet officials from the
east, could marshal the resources they needed to flee. But the local Jews,
those who had collaborated with the Soviets and those who had not,
generally remained behind.
In other ways Soviet policy created the conditions for acts of revenge.
In 1939, the Soviets had defeated, destroyed, and discredited traditional
authorities, both secular and religious. They had presided over a moment
of score settling and chaos in which many new scores were created that
might be settled in the next moment of violent transition. They had
deported or shot half a million people in lands where the total population
was just over thirteen million, meaning that most families had been
touched by the NKVD in some way. The rapid destruction of the Polish
state was not simply a fact but a source of shame, a catastrophe that
would beg for a scapegoat.
Even as Soviet power generated feelings of shame and resentment, it
forced society to break the taboo of collaboration with a foreign power.
Certain people had chosen, at the beginning, to collaborate; far more had
collaborated simply by dint of continuing to hold their positions, fearful
of deportation or worse if they did not demonstrate loyalty. With time,
almost everyone had to engage with the Soviet regime in some way or
another. The nature of the system demanded it. In seeking to transform
eastern Poland into part of their own state, Soviet leaders included the
local population in the process quite intensively: through coerced voting,
through the encouragement of denunciations, through interrogation and
torture and betrayal. Because the Soviet system was inclusive, there was
often no clear line between victims and collaborators. Often the very
experience that led to collaboration, such as torture and imprisonment,
also meant victimhood. This refined the psychological resource in a
special way. In Soviet conditions, victimhood and collaboration were
widespread and hard to define, and so the next power holder would be
the one to define them.
—
Finally, in destroying states, the Soviet Union created a political
resource. As fragile and flawed as the Polish, Estonian, Latvian, and

Lithuanian states might seem, they were the homelands of tens of
millions of Europeans. The wholesale destruction of modern states with
fully fledged political nations was an extraordinarily radical step. Of
course, not all of the (former) citizens of these (former) states cared
deeply about national independence, but many did. Insofar as the Soviets
removed states that people wanted, and insofar as the Germans could
pose as the ally of those who wished to restore them, the Germans could
manipulate a powerful desire. The nature of this opportunity depended,
of course, upon what leaders of national groups believed that they could
gain or lose from occupiers. The joint German-Soviet invasion of Poland
did not, for example, create much of a Polish political resource for the
Germans. Having already invaded Poland once in 1939, they could hardly
pose as a liberator of Poland when invading the Soviet Union from their
Polish colony in 1941. Germans could take credit on a local scale for
ending Soviet oppressions, but they could hardly promise political
autonomy to Poland.
The perspective of some of the political leaders of Poland’s ethnic
minorities was quite different. Poland had been the largest homeland of
Ukrainians beyond the Soviet Union and the largest homeland of Jews in
the world. Almost all of Poland’s Ukrainians and more than a third of
Poland’s Jews fell under Soviet rule in 1939. Neither Ukrainians nor Jews
fared well in the enlarged Soviet Union; in general their experience was
far worse than expected.
In the Ukrainian case, the opportunity this presented to the Germans
was rather strong. The Ukrainian minority in Poland was substantial and
territorially concentrated, adjacent to the Ukrainian republic of the Soviet
Union. Although Ukrainian nationalism was never the dominant political
orientation in Ukrainian political life in Poland, it did attract attention in
neighboring capitals. All regional powers had tried to turn the Ukrainian
question to their own ends in the 1920s and 1930s. The Soviets pursued a
policy of affirmative action of Ukrainians in Soviet Ukraine in the 1920s
and established a Communist Party of Western Ukraine on Polish
territory in the hope of drawing Ukrainians from Poland toward the
Soviet Union. The Poles imitated this policy in their Volhynian district in
order to draw Ukrainians in the Soviet Union towards Poland. The
Germans had cultivated Ukrainian agents within Poland, usually
nationalists, who believed correctly that Germany was the only power

that could possibly destroy both enemies: Poland and the Soviet Union.
That said, the Ukrainian nationalists associated with Germany knew
perfectly well that a major source of their local support was the social
question—chiefly the redistribution of farmland. And the Soviets were
quite aware that the Communist Party of Western Ukraine had to address
the national question. With nationalists concerned with expropriating
large estates and communists flying national flags, a certain amount of
ideological syncretism was the rule in the 1930s. For example, a local
Ukrainian communist leader could be a Jewish woman named Fryda
Szprynger, and one of her more successful underground activists could,
meanwhile, use the pseudonym “Hitler.”
The Soviet invasion of eastern Poland in 1939 meant the destruction of
the mainstream Ukrainian political parties that had functioned legally in
Poland: the Ukrainian National Democratic Alliance (UNDO), for
example, which had tried to work within legal institutions and had
opposed official antisemitism. Soviet rule created relatively favorable
conditions for groupings that had been illegal: the nationalists and the
communists—the first because they were accustomed to being
underground, the second because they could emerge from underground
and collaborate with the regime. Yet, as Jews and Poles tended to notice,
often it was Ukrainian nationalists rather than communists (insofar as
this distinction had meaning) who took up local positions of Soviet
authority. Both Ukrainian nationalists and Ukrainian communists took
the opportunity to denounce local Poles to Soviet authorities, no doubt
from both political and self-interested motives. In most villages in
southeastern Poland there was a Ukrainian activist who knew what
categories of person the NKVD was looking for and was happy to supply
an appropriate Pole. This created an empty homestead and farm;
denunciation and deportation were a version of land reform.
During the first few months of Soviet rule, the social revolution from
abroad attracted many Ukrainians. Polish authorities were often replaced
by Ukrainians, although in meaningful positions these were Ukrainians
from Soviet Ukraine. The handful of Jewish mayors were also replaced by
Ukrainians from the east. The initial Soviet deportations chiefly
concerned Poles and indeed Polish landowners, and so could be
experienced as social advance for Ukrainian peasants. Soviet-style
revolutions usually had two stages: first a gesture to the peasants, then

the seizure of their land. In 1940, the Soviets began to collectivize
agriculture in the territory they had annexed from Poland, just as they
had done a decade earlier in the Soviet Union as a whole. Some
Ukrainians recalled then the mass famine that had followed in the USSR.
Virtually none wanted to concede land to the Soviet state. Collectivization
discredited Ukrainian communists among the population and led some
Ukrainian communists to shift toward nationalism.
Ukrainian nationalists, for their part, were hoping in 1940 for a
German invasion of the Soviet Union that would create the possibility for
a Ukrainian state. These were people who had been Polish citizens, and
saw themselves as representatives of the millions of Ukrainians in Poland
and the tens of millions of Ukrainians in the Soviet Union. From their
perspective, only Germany could create the conditions for a Ukrainian
state by destroying both Poland and the USSR. Poland was no more as of
1939; in 1940, some Ukrainian nationalists joined in the German
preparations to annihilate the Soviet Union. The Germans used
Ukrainian informers to prepare the way for the invasion known as
Operation Barbarossa, and they recruited and trained hundreds of
Ukrainians for advance groups to be used in Soviet Ukraine. In early
1941, the NKVD sensed the threat and began to arrest Ukrainians in high
numbers. The fourth wave of Soviet deportations, in May and June 1941,
was heavily Ukrainian. Many thousands of Ukrainians were also
imprisoned. When the Germans did arrive in June 1941, they found the
corpses of these people left behind in Soviet prisons.
—
All in all, Soviet occupation closed Jewish possibilities. Could it also have
created a Jewish political resource for the Germans? As with the
Ukrainians, there was a Jewish nationalist Right in interwar Poland,
Betar, that was committed to building an independent national state by
revolutionary and violent means. Unlike Ukrainian nationalists, however,
Jewish nationalists were the clients and not the enemies of the Polish
state. They wanted to leave Polish territory rather than claim it for their
own. After the German invasion of September 1, 1939, leaders of Betar
fled eastward from the Germans. They were then caught in the Soviet net.
Jewish radicals, unlike Ukrainian radicals, had no experience of working

underground. The Soviets quickly identified and arrested them. The
NKVD was aware that Betar was a front for Irgun, and broke
underground Irgun circles as well. Menachem Begin, the leader of Betar
in Poland, fled from Warsaw to Vilnius and managed to hide for a time.
He was eventually arrested by the NKVD—in the middle of a game of
chess—and sentenced to eight years of hard labor at the camps of
Vorkuta.
Betar was quickly powerless in occupied Poland. Its sister organization
Irgun, based two thousand kilometers away in Palestine, was not. The
conspirators of Irgun, most of them Polish Jews, found themselves in an
unexpected predicament: considering the opportunities provided by war
but deprived of the backer which had sought to prepare them for such a
moment. They had received a certain amount of training from the Poles,
as well as money and weapons. Yet the grand scheme for which all of that
was mere preparation—a landing of thousands of Betar members in
Palestine with Polish support—was now unthinkable. No further Polish
help was coming. The Polish officers who had trained Irgun were dead or
in camps or in hiding or in exile. The latest shipment of Polish weapons
for Irgun in Palestine, on the docks in Gdynia in August 1939, was
destroyed by German fire even as Poles scrambled to unpack the weapons
to use them to defend themselves. Irgun had been preparing for a conflict
with the British Empire, but not for one in which its Polish patron would
be totally absent. As one Betar comrade wrote to another in distress in
late 1939, “we feel that there is no one behind us.”
Of the three European states with an active interest in Palestine in the
1930s, only two remained as the decade came to an end: Nazi Germany
and Great Britain. They were at war with each other, which meant that
Jewish fighters in Palestine might gain some leverage by siding with one
or the other. Nazi Germany was the enemy of Jews in Europe (although
to what extent was not fully clear, even in 1939). It was also the enemy of
the British Empire, which controlled Palestine and prevented Jewish
emigration. Irgun could not decide between the obligation to defend Jews
and the obligation to fight for a Jewish state, so chose neutrality between
Germany and Britain. Avraham Stern now led a split within Irgun,
establishing a splinter group eventually known as Lehi. He was joined by
Yitzhak Shamir, another Polish Jew who had hoped for further training in
Poland but had run out of time. Lehi then did exactly what other Far

Right groups did at the time: It made a proposal to Hitler.
The appeals sent by Jewish and Ukrainian nationalists to Hitler were
very similar. The Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists used this
language in June 1941: “The newly emerging Ukrainian State will
cooperate closely with the Great Nazi German Reich, which under the
guidance of its Führer Adolf Hitler is forming a new order in Europe and
the world and which will help the Ukrainian Nation liberate itself from
Muscovite oppression.” In Palestine, Lehi saw the British much the same
way as the Ukrainian nationalists saw the Soviets, and it drew the same
practical conclusions. In January 1941, Stern proposed “cooperation
between the New Germany and a renewed racial-national Hebrewdom,”
which would involve “the erection of a historical Jewish State on national
and totalitarian foundations, which would stand in a treaty relationship
with the German Reich, in the interest of the protection and
strengthening of the future German power position in the Near East.”
Stern assumed that Hitler wished to rid Europe of Jews and that a
logical way to do so would be to send them all to Palestine. Perhaps
misled by his contacts with Polish elites, he confused the Polish with the
German approach. The Polish regime really had supported a mass Jewish
emigration to Palestine and a Jewish state. Lehi could be trusted to make
a Jewish state that would be a good partner for Nazi Germany, continued
Stern, because “in its worldview and structure it is closely related to the
totalitarian movements of Europe.” Stern was asking Berlin to replace
Warsaw as the patron of Lehi. The documents concerning Poland’s
official Zionism, he helpfully (and correctly) noted, could be found in the
Polish archives, now under German control.
Neither of these nationalist proclamations, the Ukrainian or the
Jewish, should be understood to express the desires of the nation
concerned, or even for that matter the convictions of the authors. With
the destruction of the Polish state and the advance of German power, an
alliance with Nazis could seem logical, at least to radicals who expected
the old order to collapse anyway. Of course, those who issued such
appeals did not intend to be used by the Nazis but rather to use them for
their own purposes, however unrealistic this calculation might have been.
Even the expressions of ideological sympathy need not be taken too
literally: Some Ukrainian nationalists had once been communists, and
Lehi would shift towards a pro-Soviet orientation a few years later.

—
Every method of changing the world has advantages and disadvantages.
Different tactics generate different needs. A group that chooses legions,
as Jabotinsky was still urging Jews in Palestine to do, gambles that the
occupying empire will win the war and will then owe something to the
oppressed but supportive minority after the victory. A group that chooses
terror needs the occupying empire to be destroyed, but almost always
lacks the strength to carry out such a deed itself. Therefore it has an
objective need for an outside backer. This need for help was the political
resource available, in theory, to the Germans.
These Jewish and Ukrainian offers of collaboration with Nazi Germany
had to fail, and did fail, and in a certain way failed together. In making
their offer to Hitler, Ukrainian nationalists were revealing the political
resource, a vulnerability that Hitler did exploit up to a point: the desire
for a state. Because German forces really were going to enter lands
inhabited by Ukrainians, it was possible for the German leadership to
turn the desire of Ukrainian nationalists for a state towards their own
purposes. With Jews in Palestine, matters were entirely different. No
German troops would enter Palestine; and even if they had, they would
have encountered an Arab rather than a Jewish majority. Insofar as the
Germans wanted to exploit a local political force, it was far simpler for
them to direct Arab nationalism against both the British and the Jews, as
had been their practice already in the 1930s.
The Nazi leadership could reconcile, after its own fashion, the Jewish
and the Ukrainian nationalist appeals. Hitler did favor the elimination of
Jews from Europe, as Stern understood. But he had no desire to create a
Jewish state, even beyond Europe, even as a way to draw Jews away from
Europe. Germany was willing to use Ukrainians, as Ukrainian
nationalists hoped. But that was only because the Germans were intent
upon conquering Ukraine. The Nazis opposed Ukrainian statehood and
would imprison the Ukrainian nationalists who declared independence.
Insofar as Ukrainians collaborated with Germans, it would be as local
administrators and policemen, with no political authority. It was
precisely the murder of Jews that would become the Nazi substitute for
political activity in Ukraine (and elsewhere). In 1941, the Nazis would tell

aspiring political collaborators that the liberation to which they could
contribute was liberation from the Jews, and that any future political
cooperation would depend upon participation in this project. Thus Berlin
addressed its Jewish and its Ukrainian problems together, twisting
political aspirations toward racial murder and thereby beginning a
murderous Final Solution.
—
In 1940, the application of Soviet power in eastern Europe during the
German conquest of western Europe drove the Jews into an impossible
position. Jews suffered as much or more than any other group under
Soviet rule. They lost much from the end of Polish law, which was the
basis of the commerce by which many made a living and of the property
rights that gave their urban existence a foundation. They lost the
communal autonomy that they had enjoyed under Polish rule and the
associated rights to practice religion, run schools, and maintain contacts
with Jews around the world. Jews were deported to the Gulag in large
numbers in April and June 1940. The Jews of the second group were
refugees of the German zone of Poland who imagined that the war would
end and that they could return to their homes and businesses in places
then occupied by the Germans. They thus declined Soviet citizenship,
unaware that what they were being offered was a choice between that and
the Gulag.
In the first half of 1940, when eastern Poland had been annexed by the
Soviets but Lithuania was still an independent state, Jews fled from the
enlarged USSR to Lithuania in the tens of thousands. Along with the
large-scale attempts of Jews to return from the Soviet to the German
occupation zone and the mass refusal by Jews of Soviet passports, this
was another very strong sign that most Jews did not actually wish Soviet
rule for themselves. The NKVD reported that Jewish refugees were
particularly hostile to Soviet rule. But the Jews’ options were narrowing.
The German victory over France in June 1940 meant a long war and thus
no immediate prospect for the restoration of Poland. The Soviet
occupation of Lithuania that same month destroyed the possibility of
shelter within a neighboring and relatively supportive state. Judging from
how Jews voted with their feet, the general order of preferences had been

(1) Lithuania, (2) Poland, (3) the Soviet Union, and (4) Nazi rule. As of
summer 1940, the possible rulers of east European Jews were reduced to
two: Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union. Since emigration was for most
east European Jews all but unthinkable—Palestine and America being
closed—their mental geography was now limited to these two options.
With the wider world unattainable, with conventional states destroyed,
with Nazi Germany on the march, Jews had no choice but to see the
USSR as the lesser evil. For most of them, this was indeed a choice
between varieties of evil. The joke among Jews in Łuck was that the life
preserved by Soviet power was life imprisonment. As one Galician Jew
remembered, already under the Soviet regime “fathers of families had
become like loosely hanging limbs. The framework of their lives was torn
away; their families became unsteady; their desire for society
disappeared; and the authority of Jewish conscience crumbled.” The
special Nazi enmity to Jews put them in a different position from all of
their neighbors under Soviet power in 1939 and 1940, who could at least
imagine that a German invasion would put Soviet repression to an end.
The combination of a German threat and a Soviet reality left Jews doubly
vulnerable. Given their greater fear of Nazi Germany, Jews could seem
like the collective ally of the Soviet power that had in fact just dismantled
their traditional communities and deported or killed many of their most
active men and women.
—
The Jewish and Ukrainian questions are only a faint suggestion of the
political resource that Soviet occupation delivered to Nazi Germany. The
Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists and Lehi were fringe groups
representing national minorities who could imagine that somehow the
destruction of states provided opportunities. An infinitely greater
political resource arose when the Soviet Union destroyed entire nationstates, such as Lithuania and Latvia. Soviet state destruction made the
political perspective of people who had been marginal right-wing national
terrorists seem like the mainstream.
Lithuanians and Latvians had enjoyed statehood between the wars, but
lost it as a result of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact. In this respect the
Lithuanian and Latvian position was like the Polish one. Yet unlike

Poland, which had been divided and destroyed by Nazi Germany and the
Soviet Union together, Lithuania and Latvia were occupied and
eliminated by the Soviet Union alone. Lithuanians and Latvians, unlike
Poles, could therefore imagine a German liberation from Soviet power.
Poles experienced a simultaneous double occupation, Lithuanians and
Latvians a consecutive double occupation. During the German
occupation, Jews in Lithuania and Latvia could thus be blamed for what
happened during the Soviet period—not just for local oppressions, but for
an entire national calamity. This was a tragically unique situation.
Before the consecutive Soviet-German occupation, Lithuanian and
Latvian Jews had little reason to expect the fate that would befall them.
Interwar Lithuania was a right-wing dictatorship, but not an antisemitic
one. The dictator, Antanas Smetona, warned at home and abroad against
racial and religious discrimination, and he campaigned in particular
against what he called the “zoological nationalism and racism” of the
Hitlerian variety. His enemies on the Far Right called him the “king of the
Jews.” Such people he generally had imprisoned. Not a single Jew was
killed in a pogrom in interwar Lithuania. The one major case of antiJewish violence led to arrests, a trial, and prosecution.
By the standards of Europe in the late 1930s, Lithuania was a refuge for
Jews. In 1938 and 1939, some 23,000 Jews fled to Lithuania, some from
Nazi Germany, some from the Soviet Union. Among them was Rafał
Lemkin, who later invented the term “genocide.” In September 1939,
Germany expelled some 1,500 Jews from Suwałki, a Polish town on the
Lithuanian border that was to be incorporated into the Reich. This was
the second time in a quarter century that such a thing had happened:
Avraham Stern’s family, and many others, had been deported from
Suwałki by the Russian imperial army in 1915. These Suwałki Jews were
welcomed and cared for by Lithuanian authorities. During the GermanSoviet invasion of Poland, the German leadership tried to encourage
Lithuania to make claims against Poland, which the Lithuanian
leadership refused to do. This was all the more significant since the
Lithuanian government had been claiming the city of Vilnius from Poland
for twenty years. The independent Lithuanian state, unlike the Soviet
Union, declined to be a German ally as the war began.
As a result of the German-Soviet victory and the destruction of the
Polish state, however, Lithuania did make some territorial gains. The

Soviet Union granted the city of Vilnius, taken from northeastern Poland,
to Lithuania. This added about a hundred thousand more Jews to the
Lithuanian population. Many Jews saw Lithuanian rule as less nationalist
than Polish rule, as indeed it was, at least with respect to them. As Soviet
forces withdrew from the city and Lithuanian forces entered in late
October 1939, residents of the city, mostly Poles, attacked Jews. The
Lithuanianization of the city that followed was directed against the Polish
rather than the Jewish population. Lithuania set about making Vilnius its
capital and transporting tens of thousands of ethnic Lithuanians to the
city.
In late 1939 and early 1940, Zionists and religious Jews saw Vilnius,
which was a major Jewish city inside what was still then an independent
state, as a place of safety. Zionists fled the Soviet zone of Poland on the
correct assumption that the Soviets would otherwise destroy their
organizations and arrest them. For Jews seeking a refuge from the
enlarging USSR, Vilnius held a special hope. The writer Benzion
Benshalom recalled the mood of Jews seeking an escape from German
and Soviet power: “Faces were aglow, eyes ablaze, hearts feverish. Vilna!”
(Ironically, his brother was a communist.) The leadership of Betar fled
from the German occupation zone through the Soviet occupation zone to
Vilnius, which they then treated as their base. “Only then,” as one of them
remembered, “did we breathe more freely.” In London, Jabotinsky
referred to the Betar men who made it to Lithuania as the “saved.”
The position of Jews in interwar Latvia was, if anything, somewhat
better. Latvia was also ruled by a right-wing authoritarian regime, but not
one that was oriented to race or antisemitism. The Latvian leader, Kārlis
Ulmanis, a graduate of the University of Nebraska, took for granted the
multinational character of his state. The main ethnic conflict in Latvia
was not between Latvians and Jews but between Latvians and Germans.
Nevertheless, Germans, like Jews, served as ministers of government in
interwar Latvia. The Orthodox Jewish political party, Agudat Yisrael, had
some sway with right-wing Latvian governments, as did the Jewish
socialist party, the Bund, with left-wing governments. Latvia, like
Lithuania, passed no racist or antisemitic legislation before the war, and
took in Jewish refugees from Germany and Austria in the late 1930s. As
in Lithuania there was a Far Right movement with an antisemitic stance
in Latvia, and as in Lithuania it was illegal before the war.

Latvia and Lithuania were similar in that they were small countries
(populations about two million and three million) with substantial Jewish
populations governed by authoritarian regimes whose policies were
tolerant by the standards of the Europe of the late 1930s. Their fates were
brought together in June 1940, when the Soviet Union took advantage of
the terms of its alliance with Nazi Germany to occupy and annex them
both. Very quickly the Soviets decapitated the Latvian and Lithuanian
political classes, deporting to the Gulag most of the leaders who had not
already fled.

The subsequent and rapid Soviet takeover of the two sovereign states
created psychological, material, and especially political resources in
Latvia and Lithuania on a scale far greater than in Poland. The material
resource was enormous: Soviet rule quickly opened the question of the
property rights of the entire nation. The Soviets expropriated Jews (not
as Jews, but as businessmen), raising the question of the ultimate
ownership of their property. The psychological resource was also of an

extraordinary scale. The destruction of the two states generated feelings
of shame, humiliation, and the desire for revenge. In both Lithuania and
Latvia, an entire political order was destroyed and an entire population
could imagine its return. By destroying the Lithuanian and Latvian states,
the Soviets gave the Germans the ability to promise a war of liberation.
This was the political resource in its purest form.
The political resource included the supply of cadres: people displaced
by Soviet policy who could be exploited by the Germans. The fact that the
Soviets controlled the capitals and decimated the political elite enabled
the Germans to make a certain important selection. In the main, the men
who had actually ruled Lithuania and Latvia were sent to the Gulag or
killed. But some Lithuanian and Latvian nationalists who had fled the
interwar regimes or Soviet power made their way to Berlin. Beyond that,
a considerable number of Lithuanians and Latvians posed as Germans in
1940, which allowed them to be “repatriated” to Germany under a
German-Soviet agreement. The Germans could then decide which of
these people they would bring when they reinvaded Latvia and Lithuania.
The timing of the Soviet annexation of Latvia and Lithuania led to a
tragic coincidence. By the time the Soviets had readied the trains for their
major deportations of Lithuanian and Latvian citizens to the Gulag, the
Germans had prepared their trains for an invasion of the Soviet Union.
The deportations from Lithuania began in the early morning of June 14,
1941. About seventeen thousand people were loaded onto boxcars (of
whom only about a third ever returned). The German invasion came a
week later. Because the Soviets were preparing major repressions when
the Germans invaded, the prisons were full. Stalin raged until the very
last moment that all reports of a German invasion were propaganda. As a
result, no one could make preparations for evacuation or defense, and, of
course, prisoners were the last priority and considered dangerous. Most
of them were shot by their guards, in Lithuania and Latvia and
everywhere across the front. As a result, Germans who arrived in
Lithuania and Latvia were able to display the fresh corpses as palpable
evidence of Soviet terror. In June 1941 in the Baltics the Soviet project of
state destruction met the German project of state destruction in time and
in place.
For the German state destroyers, the men of the Einsatzgruppen
arriving to begin a second occupation of eastern Poland, Lithuania, and

Latvia in summer 1941, the encounter with Soviet power was an
opportunity. They could not have known beforehand how bountiful the
political resource would be, since they had not been trained to think of
the Soviet Union as a polity nor of Slavs or Balts as people with political
motivations. Because Germans could not know how deep the Soviet reach
into occupied societies had been, the new politics after summer 1941
would be a spontaneous creation of Germans and the local peoples whose
lands they reinvaded.
The German entrepreneurs of violence would react to a new situation
and exploit its possibilities. They did not know what they would find and
were mistaken in some of their expectations. What they brought was the
yearning for anarchy that can only be brought to the stranger, what they
learned was to exploit the experience of the Soviet occupation to further
the most radical goals of their own, and what they invented was a politics
of the greater evil. In the zone of double darkness, where Nazi creativity
met Soviet precision, the black hole was found.

6
The Greater Evil

“The epoch of statehood has come to an end.” So proclaimed the German
legal theorist Carl Schmitt. Throughout Hitler’s career, Schmitt had
provided elegant theoretical support for his Führer’s actions, in domestic
and then foreign policy, as Hitler mutated the German state and began to
destroy its neighbors. The lesson that Hitler had drawn from the Balkans,
Schmitt presented as a purely German idea: There is no such thing as
domestic politics as such, since everything begins with the confrontation
with a chosen foreign enemy. The definition of the domestic was that
which had to be manipulated to destroy what is foreign. Germany itself
had no content. The idea of the people, the Volk, was there to persuade
Germans to throw themselves into their murderous destiny as a race. The
people were only what they proved themselves to be, which without
struggle was nothing.
Beyond manipulation itself there was no object or subject of politics.
There was only the darkness that is consummate when gifted minds such
as Schmitt’s cloak evil with unreason. As Germany undid Austria and
Czechoslovakia, as the Soviet Union occupied and annexed Lithuania,
Latvia, and Estonia, and as the two together destroyed Poland, Schmitt
prepared the legal theory of statelessness. It began from the axiom that
international law arises not from norms but from power. Rules are
interesting only insofar as they reveal who can make exceptions to them.
For Schmitt, “obsolete interstate international law” was a masquerade,
since all that mattered was who could destroy states. If Germany followed
its Führer and ignored “the empty concept of state territory,” German
power would flow to its natural frontiers. The result would be a “sensibly
divided earth,” untroubled by the normative restraints on political and

military action that Schmitt described as Jewish.
Schmitt believed that the German understanding of law had to be
purged of the Jewish “infection,” by which he meant principles that
blocked conclusions such as his own. Affirming the end of the state meant
applying the law of the jungle and presenting it as actual law. Might did
make right, not just in practice, but as a matter of principle; and, of
course, this conclusion came very close to abolishing the very idea of
principle. The same case was made, in different ways, by other Nazi legal
thinkers, such as Viktor Bruns and Edgar Tartarin-Tarnheyden. Arthur
Seyß-Inquart, who presided over the end of the Austrian state and
administered the occupied Netherlands, was a lawyer and doctor of law.
In between those two assignments he was the assistant to Hans Frank,
the governor-general of occupied Poland. In western Europe, said SeyßInquart, we have a function; in eastern Europe “we have a National
Socialist mission.”
Frank, Hitler’s personal lawyer, never ceased to provide circular and
specious defenses of the “legality” of what he was doing in occupied
Poland: “The law is what serves the race, and lawlessness is what hurts
the race.” Non-racist norms were simply the work of Jews, “who
instinctively saw in jurisprudence the best possibility to carry out their
own racial work.” Frank never forgot that racial triumph meant racial
comfort, that Lebensraum was about the pleasures of his living room. He
was the sort of man who not only stole a royal castle for his own
residence, but actually made tours of other castles to steal their silver for
his own table. He sent his wife to make shopping excursions to the
Cracow ghetto, where the price was always right. When he left Poland he
took its Rembrandts with him.
Lawyers were extremely prominent among those who exported anarchy
from Germany. Bruno Müller, for example, commanded an
Einsatzgruppe in Poland in 1939 and then an Einsatzkommando in the
Soviet Union in 1941. He was a mass murderer of Poles and Jews in two
campaigns to obliterate the state. At the first execution of his second
campaign he lifted into his hands a two-year-old Jewish child and said:
“You must die so that we can live.”
This is what law for the race and against the state had become—and
indeed had always meant.

—
Germany at war remained a state, if an altered one. For most Germans
most of the time, law in its entirely traditional sense, implemented by
state instances, still organized life. Policies directed chiefly against
German citizens, such as the discrimination of Jews, were most
significant as a preparation for a larger struggle. Policies that seemed to
weaken the German state, such as the lawless zones of the concentration
camps, were templates for the far larger stateless spaces that would arise
in the East. Policies that seemed to transform the state, such as the
creation of hybrid institutions that united both SS and traditional police,
revealed their potential east of Germany, where prewar states were
destroyed. Only beyond Germany could the exception truly become the
rule, as Schmitt wished, because only beyond Germany could normal
political life be obliterated and a new ethos of nihilistic power be created.
As the Einsatzgruppen followed the German army eastward into the
doubly occupied lands and then into the prewar Soviet Union, their
commanders sometimes communicated with Berlin. British authorities,
aided by Polish cryptographers, had built for themselves a replica of the
Enigma machine that the Germans used for encoding and decoding
messages. As the British came to realize, what they were decoding were
kill figures. “We are in the presence,” said Winston Churchill, “of a crime
without a name.” Its perpetrators were human beings, operating with
initiative and creativity in political circumstances of their own making.
State destruction did not alter politics, but rather created a new form of
politics, which enabled a new kind of crime.
The Holocaust has ingrained racial stereotypes in our own minds; but
no stereotype can explain why and how, in the six months after the
German invasion of the Soviet Union, a technique to kill Jews in large
numbers was developed and some one million Jews were murdered. A
stereotype of Germans is that they are orderly and follow plans. Yet when
the invasion of the Soviet Union began on June 22, 1941, Berlin had no
plan for the mass extermination of Soviet Jews, let alone for all Jews
under German control. One notion was that Soviet Jews would be sent to
Siberia after a quick and triumphant military campaign against the Red
Army. There was no discussion of a Final Solution to take place during
the war, nor could there have been, since German leaders took for

granted that the war would take weeks and the Final Solution years.
Sometimes the Einsatzgruppen who followed the Wehrmacht into the
Soviet Union are presented as unstoppable agents of evil with an
unambiguous program of total killing. In this argument, the men of the
Einsatzgruppen knew from the beginning, regardless of whether or not
there was a plan, that they were supposed to kill all of the Jews. An image
emerges of the Einsatzgruppen as special antisemitic units with perfect
knowledge and exclusive responsibility. But this was not, in fact, the case.
The Einsatzgruppen had orders to shoot some Jews from the beginning,
but not to shoot them all; their initial instructions mentioned Jews as one
category among others. Their basic task at the beginning of the invasion
of the Soviet Union was to demolish the state, as they had done in Poland.
Thus their targets were groups thought to be mainstays of the Soviet
regime. In Poland this had meant educated Poles; in the Soviet Union this
meant, as the Nazis saw matters, communists and Jewish males.
Antisemitism cannot fully explain the behavior of the members of the
Einsatzgruppen. The Einsatzgruppen sent into Austria and
Czechoslovakia in 1938 did not kill Jews. The Einsatzgruppen sent into
Poland in 1939 killed far more Poles than Jews. Even the Einsatzgruppen
sent into the USSR killed others besides Jews. Throughout the occupation
of the Soviet Union they murdered the disabled, Gypsies, communists,
and, in some regions, Poles. There were for that matter no Germans (or
collaborators) whose only task was to shoot Jews; everyone who was
expected to shoot Jews was also expected to shoot others, and did so.
Among the thousands of members of the Einsatzgruppen and the tens of
thousands of Germans who shot Jews there is no known perpetrator who
agreed to kill Jews but refused to kill Gypsies or Belarusian civilians or
Soviet prisoners of war. Nor were there perpetrators who agreed to kill
Belarusian civilians or Soviet prisoners of war or Gypsies but not Jews.
The people who killed people, killed people.
The Einsatzgruppen shot others besides Jews; and others besides the
Einsatzgruppen shot Jews. Although the Einsatzgruppen were the first
to shoot Jews in large numbers, they were a small minority of the
German perpetrators. The myth of their total responsibility arose during
postwar trials in the Federal Republic of Germany as a way to protect the
majority of German killers and isolate the killing from German society as
such. In fact, German policemen were far more numerous than the

Einsatzgruppen on the eastern front and killed more Jews. These men
usually lacked the special preparation of the Einsatzgruppen, but they
had been a focus of Himmler and Heydrich’s attempt to create hybrid
institutions within Germany that would permit destruction and racial
warfare beyond its borders. Policemen deemed unreliable had been
removed from service. By the time of the invasion of the USSR, about a
third of policemen with officer rank belonged to the SS, and about twothirds belonged to the National Socialist party. Regardless of whether or
not they were party or SS members, German policemen were dispatched
to the East and murdered Jews. German soldiers also killed a large
number of Jews, and assisted the Einsatzgruppen and the police in
organizing ever larger mass shootings in 1941.
In 1941, the German members of the Einsatzgruppen, the German
policemen, and the German soldiers worked together with a large number
of local people of multiple nationalities who had experienced Soviet rule.
Together these groups developed techniques of mass murder during the
first six months after the German invasion. The techniques reflected no
prior plan; indeed, some of them contravened initial orders. The
Einsatzgruppen were doing what Himmler and Heydrich told them to do,
but their commanders were also refining methods of killing and inventing
rationalizations for killing. The commanders had to test whether their
operations and rationalizations were acceptable to other German forces;
they had to persuade their own men to kill women and children; and they
had to find ways to generate local collaboration as the job became too
large and difficult.
If the killing of 1941 involved locals, then perhaps it was a result of local
antisemitism rather than German politics? This is a popular way to
explain the Holocaust without politics: as a historically predictable
outburst of the barbarity of east Europeans. This sort of explanation is
reassuring, since it permits the thought that only peoples associated with
extravagant antisemitism would indulge in disastrous violence. This
comforting and erroneous thought is a legacy of Nazi racism and
colonialism. The racist and colonial idea that the Holocaust began as an
elemental explosion of primitive antisemitism arose as Nazi propaganda
and apologetics. The Germans wished to display the killing of Jews on the
eastern front as the righteous anger of oppressed peoples against their
supposed Jewish overlords.

Even the most hidebound Nazis realized, once they had actually arrived
in eastern Europe, that the situation was not so simple as this. The truly
spontaneous score settling that followed the arrival of German troops was
politically rather than racially motivated and killed a very small number
of Jews—and also killed people who were not Jewish. The instructions
conveyed to the Einsatzgruppen commanders were to create the
appearance of local spontaneity, which, of course, suggests that the
reality was absent. In practice, the Germans concluded within a few
weeks that the stimulation of pogroms among people who had been ruled
by the Soviet Union was not the way forward to a Final Solution. In
consecutively occupied Lithuania, where the Holocaust began, less than
one percent of the Jews who were murdered were victims of pogroms. For
that matter, Germans were present at every single pogrom.
After the war, Soviet propaganda repeated the Nazi case. One
unpleasant reality with which Soviet propagandists had to contend was
that the Holocaust had begun precisely where the Soviet Union had
brought its own new revolutionary order in 1939 and 1940. A second was
that Soviet citizens of all nationalities, including considerable numbers of
communists, had collaborated with the Germans in the killing of Jews
everywhere that contact with Germans was made: both in the territories
that the Soviets annexed in 1939 and 1940 and in the territories of the
prewar Soviet Union, including Soviet Russia. Thus, Soviet propagandists
tried with Orwellian precision to ethnicize history and to limit
responsibility for the Holocaust to Lithuanians and Latvians, precisely
the peoples whose states the Soviet Union had destroyed in 1940, and to
west Ukrainians, whose national aspirations were also crushed by Soviet
power. This export of moral responsibility seemed to justify the renewed
Soviet takeover of these lands after the war. Thus the Nazis first and the
Soviets later made efforts to direct responsibility for the killing of the
Jews to the countries they both invaded.
Certainly there was abundant local antisemitism in eastern Europe.
Hostility to Jews in the major Jewish homeland had been an important
current in religious, cultural, and political life for hundreds of years. In
interwar Poland in particular, the idea that Jews were alien to the
national body and should leave the national territory was ever more
popular in the 1930s. Yet the relationship between sentiment and killing
is not straightforward. Age-old antisemitism cannot explain why pogroms

began precisely in summer 1941. Such an explanation ignores the
suggestive fact that pogroms were most numerous where Germans drove
out Soviet power, and the obviously material fact that the instigation of
pogroms in such places was explicit German policy. Pogroms and other
forms of local collaboration in killing were less likely in Poland, where
antisemitism had been more prevalent before the war, than they were in
Lithuania and Latvia, where antisemitism was less prevalent. In the
Soviet Union, where before the war antisemitism was a crime, there was
much more direct collaboration in the killing of Jews than in Poland. In
the occupied USSR, the killing of Jews began immediately upon contact
with German forces. In occupied Poland, the Holocaust began more than
two years after the German invasion and was largely isolated from the
local population. In the occupied Soviet Union, the killing of Jews took
place in the open air, in front of the population, with the help of young
male Soviet citizens.
It is tempting to imagine that a simple idea in the minds of simple
people decades past and thousands of miles away can explain a complex
event. The notion that local east European antisemitism killed the Jews of
eastern Europe confers upon others a sense of superiority akin to that the
Nazis once felt. These people are quite primitive, we can allow ourselves
to think. Not only does this account fail as an explanation of the
Holocaust; its racism prevents us from considering the possibility that
not only Germans and Jews but also local peoples were individual human
agents with complex goals that were reflected in politics. When we fall
into the trap of ethnicization and collective responsibility, we collude with
Nazi and Soviet propagandists in the abolition of political thought and
the lifting of individual agency.
What happened in the second half of 1941 was an accelerating
campaign of murder that took a million Jewish lives and apparently
convinced the German leadership that all Jews under their control could
be eliminated. This calamity cannot be explained by stereotypes of
passive or communist Jews, of orderly or preprogrammed Germans, of
beastly or antisemitic locals, or indeed by any other cliché, no matter how
powerful at the time, no matter how convenient today. This
unprecedented mass murder would have been impossible without a
special kind of politics.

—
The commencement of mass killing in the doubly occupied lands was the
latest stage in the development of the new politics initiated eight years
earlier, when Hitler came to power in Germany. Just as Nazis had to
reach other Germans to develop biological politics within Germany, so
Germans had to reach non-Germans for Nazi ideology to be realized
beyond Germany.
In a way, the invasion of 1941 mirrored Hitler’s takeover of power in
Germany. A planetary vision of bloody racial struggle, something not
inherently attractive to most people most of the time, was translated at
moments of stress into concepts and images that could generate political
support. In Germany in 1933, Hitler’s notion that Jews were communists
and communists were Jews was translated into the much more banal but
accessible idea that rule from the Left would mean chaos and hunger for
Germany. In eastern Europe in 1941, Judeobolshevism was also
translated from vision into politics, but in lands where people had
actually experienced Soviet rule. The key to this translation of ideology to
politics in both cases was an effective appeal to human experience at the
crucial time. In Germany in 1933, Hitler directed fear against the eastern
neighbor, the Soviet Union. In 1941, in the doubly occupied lands,
Germans directed the experience of Soviet occupation against Jewish
neighbors.
In a dark irony, Nazis profited from their basic error. Their essential
idea was that the Soviet Union was a Jewish empire, which would be
destroyed by a German empire. When Germany invaded the Soviet Union
in June 1941, however, the societies that German invaders encountered
were not divided between Jewish rulers and Christian victims. For one
thing, the Soviets had been more effective than the Germans in bodily
removing their human targets from the scene. Half a million or so Polish,
Lithuanian, and Latvian citizens, including many Jews and members of
other national minorities, had been deported to the Gulag (where many
of them had already died). The corpses of thousands more Polish,
Lithuanian, and Latvian citizens, including Jews and members of other
national minorities, were buried in hidden Soviet mass graves. All of
these indisputable victims of Soviet rule were dead or thousands of miles
away. Even the prisoners of the NKVD could not usually be recruited,

since most of them were shot or deported just as the Germans arrived.
To a degree that the Germans could not imagine, the Soviets had
integrated the local populations into their own system. This meant that
people in the doubly occupied lands could see themselves as victims, even
though or indeed precisely because they had exercised a certain amount
of power in the Soviet regime. The psychological and political reasons to
overcompensate by insisting on victimhood were strong. There were the
people of the Left who had first supported the Soviet system and then
changed their minds, and now wanted to forget their original
commitments. There were the men and women who had at first resisted
the Soviet system, and then allowed themselves to be recruited by it as
agents and informers. Such people had escaped death or deportation by
collaborating with the Soviets, and were thus still at home when the
Germans arrived—and eager to purge their own pasts by collaborating
again. There were the young men who had been drafted into the Red
Army, and then deserted when the Germans arrived. There were the
policemen who had served the interwar governments and then the Soviet
regime, and thus had helped deport those who had actually resisted the
Soviets. When the Germans arrived, such policemen had every reason to
prove themselves cooperative. There were the people who had served the
Soviet security apparatus at a very high level—so high that they knew
others would remember. In those cases the people in question had to
maintain an important position with the Germans in order to survive,
and they sometimes did.
The Soviet system was not a Jewish conspiracy, and most communist
party members, policemen, and collaborators had not been Jews. The
Germans had to believe that they were, since the entire premise of the
invasion was that a Jewish cabal would quickly crumble as its local
Jewish collaborators were eliminated. Whatever local people might have
said to save their own skins during the war or ethnicize their experiences
thereafter, they generally knew that nothing of the kind was true, since
they had actually experienced the Soviet system. The Soviet
administration did employ Jews in higher numbers than the prewar
regimes, and it did employ them disproportionately to their numbers.
Nevertheless, Soviet power was based everywhere in the local majorities:
be they Latvian, Lithuanian, Belarusian, Ukrainian, Russian, or Polish.
Insofar as non-Jews made the claim that Jews were Soviet collaborators

and that Soviet collaborators were Jews (and insofar as such claims are
made today), they minimized the indispensable role that non-Jewish
locals played in the Soviet regime. In defining communism as Jewish and
Jews as communists, the German invaders in fact pardoned the vast
majority of Soviet collaborators.
The involvement of essentially everyone in the Soviet system, which
was the political reality, could be reduced to the idea of a few guilty Jews,
which was a political fantasy. The Judeobolshevik myth confirmed the
idea that the Nazis had to hold in order for their own invasion to make
sense: that one blow to the Soviet Union could begin the undoing of the
world Jewish conspiracy and that one blow to the Jews could bring down
the Soviet Union. It simultaneously allowed the people who had actually
partaken of Soviet power to separate the past from themselves, both in
their own imaginations and in their interactions with the new anti-Soviet
Nazi ruler. When Heydrich wrote of the need for “self-cleansing,” he had
in mind that communities could be spurred to cleanse themselves of
Jews. In fact, insofar as locals sided, or pretended to side, with Nazi
policies towards the Jews, they were cleansing themselves of their own
past. German ignorance of the politics of Soviet rule and occupation
created a certain opportunity for locals to exploit Germans.
As a result, the murderous politics that emerged was a joint creation of
Germans and locals, each of whom was performing the undoing of Soviet
power, but with different ideas of what that power had been, and with
different interests. To be sure, the coordination of actors with different
experiences, perceptions, and goals is what politics is about. But here, in
this special time and place, where one extraordinarily severe regime gave
way to another, where collaboration with the Soviets had been broad and
where Nazi instructions for racial murder were general, there was no
guiding source of political authority. The politics of the greater evil was a
common creation at a time of chaos.
—
In a sense, 1941 was a reprise of 1938, of the Anschluss of Austria, the
first Nazi success in state destruction. As some Nazis learned in Vienna,
the suspension of state authority itself creates a political resource, since
suddenly almost no one wishes to be identified with the old regime and

everyone wishes to be supported, or at least spared, by the new one.
When the new regime was a Nazi one, racism permitted much of the
population to separate itself, by way of public performances, from its own
actual political history. In the occupied Soviet Union in 1941, as in Austria
in 1938, the collapse of the prior regime supplied aesthetic elements of a
political scenography by which the local population performed Nazi
ideology, reconciling its own interests and hopes with the perceived ideas
of those who now held power. The public and ritual identification of Jews
with the prior regime delegitimized both at the same time, in a closed
circle of condemnation that left the majority outside and relatively safe. If
the regime had collapsed, and the Jews were the regime, then their
downfall was the logical consequence. Just as people must be
concentrated before they can be murdered en masse, so must
responsibility be concentrated before it can be abolished. Thus Jews and
only Jews were to answer for the past. And when they were assembled
and murdered, the responsibility went up in smoke.
In Austria in 1938 a large number of local Nazis had made their own
plans for Austrian Jews, and so the actions taken when the state
collapsed were immediate and racial. In doubly occupied eastern Poland,
the first place reached by German forces in their reinvasion of June 1941,
the reaction was not so precise, because locals could not be sure at first
what the Nazis expected. Of course, the German displacement of Soviet
power led to a good deal of local score settling, just as the Soviet
displacement of Polish power had done twenty-one months before. The
initial beatings, humiliations, and killings that commenced with the
arrival of the Germans were not, however, organized by ethnicity, but
rather driven by personal grievances during the occupation. In the days
immediately after the Germans arrived, Poles did kill Jews, but they also
killed other Poles. Large pogroms of Jews were not precipitated by the
withdrawal of the Soviets but by the arrival of the Germans.
The Germans seemed to have conceived a basic scenography of regime
change. Brought by the Einsatzgruppen and the German Order Police
with the invasion of the USSR, it strongly resembled the ritual violence of
the SA in Vienna. The equivalent of the “scrubbing parties” of spring 1938
was the ritualized destruction of Lenin and Stalin statues in the doubly
occupied lands in summer 1941. Forcing Jews to remove propaganda was
a way to blame them for it. Those who forced them to do so or who

contemplated the scene were releasing themselves from responsibility for
the old order and ingratiating themselves to the masters of the new one.
—
What local people expected from the German invasion of 1941 depended
upon their experience of Soviet rule in 1940. And what the Soviet
experience had meant depended, in turn, upon interwar politics. The
various peoples of eastern Poland—Poles, Ukrainians, Belarusians, Jews
—reacted very differently to the German invasion of June 1941 not
because they belonged to various ethnicities, but because they had
different hopes and aims arising from prior experiences. In southeastern
Poland, there was more collaboration with the Germans in the early days
and weeks of the invasion than in northeastern Poland, because in
southeastern Poland there were Ukrainian nationalists who could believe
that a German invasion would advance their political interests.
As Ukrainian nationalists helped organize pogroms in reinvaded
southeastern Poland in summer 1941, they also helped the Germans to
translate the experience of Soviet rule into a fantasy of Ukrainian
innocence and Jewish guilt. When the corpses of prisoners were found
inside an NKVD prison, German propaganda inevitably presented the
executioners as Jews. When on June 30 the Germans removed some of
the bodies of the thousands of prisoners shot by the NKVD in Lwów,
Ukrainian nationalists helped them portray these killings as a Jewish
crime against the Ukrainian nation. The actual NKVD officers who had
performed the actual executions had gone, but the Jews of Lwów
remained. Here, as elsewhere, corpses were put on display wherever they
were found, the horror associated with the Jews. The shock of the
moment helped transform a political crime into an ethnic one; an ethnic
crime meant ethnic responsibility; murder of those held to be responsible
was not so much revenge as a transformation of the past. Recent history
became a racial fable, with murder as the moral. Of course, in individual
cases, matters could be much simpler than this. One Ukrainian survivor
of a Soviet prison shooting, for example, became a regional police
commander for the Germans.
In Lwów on July 25, 1941, more than four weeks after the NKVD had
shot its prisoners, Jews were killed in a pogrom organized by the

Germans with the help of local nationalists. This was anything but a
spontaneous reaction. Active assistance in pogroms in summer 1941
provided useful political cover for the large number of Ukrainians who
had been communists or Soviet collaborators or both. The
Judeobolshevik myth, spread locally by militias, provided the perfect
escape route for most Soviet collaborators, who, in fact, were Ukrainian.
Nationalists told fellow Ukrainians that they could purge themselves of
the stain of collaboration with the Soviets by killing one Jew. Quite often,
as in the town of Mizoch, some of the collaborators with Soviet rule were
Ukrainian nationalists who, until summer 1941, had cooperated with
Jews in the Soviet apparatus.
By reducing actual Ukrainian political experience to the abstraction of
Judeobolshevism, the Germans gave Ukrainians who had collaborated
with the Soviets a chance, which they quickly took. Again and again,
Ukrainians identified Jews as communists and Soviet collaborators,
thereby sheltering themselves and their families. In the town of Klevan,
for example, Ukrainians went from Jewish house to Jewish house,
pointing out supposed Soviet collaborators. In Dubno, where threequarters of the population was Jewish, some of the Ukrainians allowed by
the Germans to run the town in 1941 had offered their services to the
Soviets in 1939. In other words, Ukrainians who spent the first two years
of the war helping the local NKVD commander (who was Jewish) deport
Poles, Jews, and Ukrainians shifted to helping the SS kill Jews,
Ukrainians, and Poles whom they—actual Soviet collaborators—
denounced as Soviet collaborators. The Germans were unable to process
the rush of denunciations, and, falling back upon their own racial
illusions, were often manipulated. Double collaboration was noticed by
Jews and Poles in these places, but is absent in both Ukrainian and
German histories of the war.
—
In doubly occupied northeastern Poland, where there was no national
question and thus no political resource, the chain of events was rather
different. In the weeks after the invasion, the Germans dedicated far
more of their own resources to provoking violence against Jews, with far
weaker results. Jews were killed by the Germans, and eventually also by

Poles, but in smaller numbers and in fewer places.

In Białystok, a major city of northeastern Poland, the Germans began
the mass killing themselves in June 1941. By this time the city had already
been occupied twice. First had come the German army in September
1939, followed by the bloodiest German special unit of the Polish
campaign, Einsatzgruppe IV, which killed Poles and Jews in the city. By
the terms of the Treaty on Borders and Friendship between Nazi
Germany and the Soviet Union of the twenty-eighth of that month, the
Wehrmacht and SS withdrew from Białystok to be replaced by the Red
Army and the NKVD. Under Soviet power, much of the city center was
disassembled, and Jewish enterprises (along with all others) were closed.
The Soviet occupation then continued until the German reinvasion of
June 1941. On June 27, 1941, Order Police Battalion 329 entered
Białystok, with general orders to eliminate Soviet stragglers and
“enemies.” What followed was a new type of German mass murder,
perhaps meant as a prototype.
Jews were ordered to clear Białystok of Lenin and Stalin statues as

Soviet music played in the background. German policemen spread
through the city, with orders to seize all Jewish men of military age. They
shot a number of them on the spot. German policemen shot ten Jews
inside one of the city’s many small synagogues and then left their corpses
on its steps. They seized some women and children and well over a
thousand men. Some Germans raped Jewish women. Meanwhile, other
German policemen sealed the neighborhood around the synagogue and
mounted a machine gun in front of it. The Germans then forced the Jews
into the synagogue, poured gasoline on the exterior, and set it aflame.
The screaming was punctuated by machine gun fire for about half an
hour. The logic of this scenography was evident: The Jews were
responsible for the Soviet occupation, and liberation meant killing them.
This was no doubt clear enough to a population that was fully aware of
the Judeobolshevik myth, which had been widespread on the Polish Right
in the interwar period. Nevertheless, the German mass murder by
immolation of June 27 did not lead to the immediate results the Germans
seem to have expected.
In those days of late June and early July 1941, Poles were settling
scores in northeastern Poland. Just as the arrival of the Red Army twenty
months before had brought local violence, so, too, did the arrival of the
German army. Some Poles killed some Jews, but some Poles also killed
other Poles. These spontaneous individual killings followed no
scenography. Poles did not immediately follow the Białystok example, as
clear as it was. Two days after the mass murder in Białystok, Heydrich
issued a specific order to his Einsatzgruppen to inspire pogroms while
this was still possible, in the chaos of the collapse of Soviet power. These
“self-cleansing efforts” were to be “provoked without leaving a trace, to be
intensified when necessary, to be channeled into the proper course. The
local ‘self-defense’ should be denied the possibility of later referring to
political assurances.”
If Heydrich’s order was meant to bring about widespread pogroms in
northeastern Poland, it failed. In contrast to southeastern Poland, where
Ukrainian nationalists were at work, there was no obvious political
question, no prior political organization, and no body of selected and
trained emigrants to translate the German program into a local
liberation. In early July 1941, northeastern Poland received unusually
intense attention from the Nazi leadership and the German police.

Heydrich repeated his orders to incite pogroms. Himmler, who was
disappointed with the absence of pogroms in the region, came to
Białystok and gave a similar order. Even Göring visited the region during
these days and issued the same instructions himself.
The presence and preferences of three of the highest Nazi officials
brought an unusually thick presence of German police forces to the
region. They came from three different directions. Elements of
Einsatzgruppe B returned from the east, police from the enlarged Reich
arrived from the northeast, and police from Warsaw in the General
Government arrived from the southwest. The members of all three of
these units had a great deal of experience in the mass murder of Poles
and Jews. Indeed, some of the policemen coming from Warsaw already
had memories of prior murder in Białystok, since the Warsaw stationary
police had been constituted from Einsatzgruppe IV, which had ravaged
the city in 1939. Even this unusual attention by the top German
leadership and the rally of German police forces from all sides could not
compensate for the absence of the political resource. The Germans
provoked about a dozen pogroms, and local Poles killed several thousand
Jews. These results were far inferior, from the German perspective, to the
killing in southeastern Poland, where politically motivated Ukrainians
were at work.
The scale of the murder was also inferior to what the Germans were
already achieving to the north and east, as they drove Soviet forces from
Lithuania and Latvia and occupied these countries themselves. Indeed,
the return visit of German forces to northeastern Poland in early July
1941 was probably an attempt to match the results already achieved in
Lithuania and Latvia. The pogroms in northeastern Poland began after
Germans and Lithuanians were already killing Jews in Lithuania, one
whole country to the north and east. For that matter, the pogroms in
northeastern Poland began after Germans and Latvians were killing Jews
in Latvia, two whole countries to the north and east. The killings in
northeastern Poland, in this broader perspective, represented a deescalation rather than an escalation, since murder in the region was much
less widespread than in Lithuania and Latvia. And it stopped after a few
weeks. Pogroms without a political resource were a blind alley.
The Germans were learning a new politics, and both success and failure
were instructive. The distribution of pogroms, and the absence of truly

spontaneous pogroms, demonstrated that the initial Nazi assumptions
about local behavior were wrong. The Nazi logic was that the subhumans
could be provoked to kill their Jewish exploiters. In fact, pogroms in
northeastern Poland tended to take place where non-Jews had
collaborated with the Soviet regime. In places where Jewish communists
were numerous, pogroms were actually less common, since communism
in a given locality meant contacts between Jews and non-Jews and a
habit of conspiracy. Communist Jews had places to seek advice and
places to hide. The same held for Piłsudski’s interwar electoral bloc,
which had been a multinational undertaking. When it was significant in a
given community, Jews and Poles tended to have civil relations, and
pogroms were less likely to take place.
The most notorious pogrom in northeastern Poland, at Jedwabne on
July 10, 1941, demonstrated how little the Germans understood. German
police returned to Jedwabne on that day, more than two weeks after the
actual change of regime, and two weeks after the Białystok example. In
Jedwabne, the Germans had, although they did not know this, the ideal
conditions for a pogrom. In the interwar years communism and the
Piłsudski movement had been weak in the area, which meant that there
was little tradition of Jewish-Polish contacts. The person who had
betrayed the anti-Soviet Polish underground in Jedwabne to the Soviets
was a Pole, not a Jew. The Germans were offering, as the Poles
understood even if the Germans did not, an opportunity for selfcleansing, in which responsibility for the Soviet regime could be placed
upon the local Jews and then eliminated.
The scenography in Jedwabne followed closely that of Białystok, except
that here Germans set the rules and Poles followed them. In the presence
of German police, some local Poles forced some local Jews to remove the
Lenin statue. Then about three hundred Jews, some carrying a red
banner to symbolize their supposed link to communism, were marched to
a barn and burned alive by some of their Polish neighbors. As in most
such cases, individuals who had collaborated with communism were
certainly killing individuals who had not. The mass murder created a
collective stereotype, ethnicizing the guilt and rearranging the past. The
Lenin statue was burned in the barn along with the Jews (much as Lenin
signs were burned with “Jewish” books back in Germany). The lie that the
Germans told to the Poles through posters and megaphones—that Jews

were communists and communists Jews—was told back to the Germans
by the Poles in cinders and ash.
In northeastern Poland, pogroms followed the Białystok choreography.
Germans assembled Poles; Poles assembled Jews; Poles beat and
humiliated Jews. Poles forced Jews to sing Soviet songs, carry Soviet
flags, and destroy a nearby Lenin or Stalin monument when one was
available. These murderous rituals were a reformulation of the experience
of a shattering era that had now passed, but not an immediate and
unreflective reaction to suffering. These pogroms were not spontaneous
acts of revenge, but a joint effort, by Germans and locals, to reassemble
the experience of the Soviet occupation in a way that was acceptable to
both sides.
The Jedwabne method of killing Jews, horrible as it was, could not
become a Final Solution because there was no political resource. The
Germans could appeal to psychological and material resources: Poles
could exculpate themselves from their own association with Soviet rule by
killing Jews, and they could take Jewish property. In the Jedwabne
region, where owning a mule was a mark of prosperity, this motive
cannot be discounted. But Germany could not even pretend to offer
Poland to the Poles. Germany had already invaded Poland once. Indeed,
during the first invasion of September 1939, German forces had actually
reached Jedwabne and the other places in northeastern Poland where the
July 1941 pogroms took place. That first time around, in September 1939,
German forces had mainly been interested in murdering Poles. After
withdrawing from the region, the Germans had annexed and colonized
much of western and central Poland, as everyone knew. When the
Germans returned in 1941 they did not even bother to make political
promises to Poles. In fact, the Germans intended to kill Poles after using
them to kill Jews.
The presence or absence of pogroms in doubly occupied eastern Poland
had to do with recent political history and thus with a political sensibility
that Nazis did not believe that subhumans could possess. But the political
learning came quickly. In Lithuania, where the political resource was
vast, pogroms were training grounds for people who could be selected by
the Germans for more organized methods of mass killing. By the time the
Germans reached Latvia, they had understood that pogroms were useful
mainly as a method of recruitment. Rather than being discouraged that

the masses did not join in pogroms, they hired the people who seemed
interested in leading them.
It was in the consecutively occupied lands of Lithuania and Latvia that
the Holocaust began. Unlike in eastern Poland, in Lithuania and Latvia
the apparently chaotic killing did escalate to a systematic Final Solution.
At the end of 1941 the vast majority of Polish Jews were still alive, but
almost all Lithuanian and Latvian Jews were dead.
—
The Germans understood that there was a Lithuanian question and came
to grasp the full potential of the political resource. Lithuanians were Balts
and therefore racially more valuable, from a Nazi perspective, than Slavs
such as Poles. The Soviets had destroyed the Lithuanian state, and
thousands of Lithuanian emigrants sought shelter in Germany. The
Germans had a year between the Soviet destruction of Lithuania in June
1940 and their own invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 to screen
and train these people, preparing a corps of locals to implement German
policy. A Lithuanian Activist Front was founded in Berlin in November
1940. The Lithuanian politicians involved believed that they would be
exploiting German military force to liberate Lithuania, whereas the
Germans assumed they could channel Lithuanian political energies to
their own purposes.
The Lithuanian activists arrived with the Germans in June 1941 and
served as translators, literally and figuratively, of German intentions.
Lithuanians hung German posters (in the Lithuanian language)
identifying Jews with Soviet rule and Soviet crimes. This had a different
resonance in Lithuania than it had in Germany: If communism could be
limited to Jews, an exoneration was gifted to Lithuanians and all the
other non-Jews who had collaborated with Soviet authorities. Germans
did not understand, though Lithuanians did, that Soviet rule had already
brought about the expropriation of Lithuanian Jews. Of the 1,593
businesses that the Soviets had nationalized in Lithuania in autumn
1940, Jews had owned 1,327, or 83 percent. With the Soviets gone, all of
these businesses could be claimed by Lithuanians—provided that their
previous Jewish owners did not reappear. Many of the wealthier
Lithuanian Jews had been deported by the Soviets to the Gulag; those

who remained would be vulnerable to Germans who wanted them killed
and Lithuanians (and other inhabitants of Lithuania, including Poles and
Russians) who were sitting in their businesses or offices. In the media
and in person Lithuanians made the case to other Lithuanians that the
German policy of murdering Jews was part of a transaction that would
favor the revival of Lithuania and the renewal of its middle class. The
Lithuanian Activist Front declared Lithuanian independence.
The politics of mass killing was a joint creation, a meeting of
Lithuanian experiences and Nazi expectations. Lithuanians had been
involved with Soviet rule, and so Nazi Judeobolshevism offered them an
opportunity that the Germans themselves did not fully grasp. Members of
all national groups in Lithuania, not just Lithuanians and Jews but also
Poles and Russians, collaborated with the Soviet regime. Jews were
somewhat more likely to do so than Lithuanians, but since Lithuanians
were far more numerous, their role in the Soviet regime was much more
important. Lithuanians quickly grasped that the Judeobolshevik myth
amounted to a mass political amnesty for prior collaboration with the
Soviets, as well as the general possibility to claim all of the businesses
that the Soviets had taken from the Jews.
Actual political experience yielded to remorseless racial logic, not only
in side switching but also in the accompanying violent actions.
Lithuanian activists told known Soviet collaborators that a bloody
absolution of their political sin was possible. In killing Jews, Lithuanians
who had worked for the Soviet order could get a new start in politics in
the eyes of other Lithuanians—the ones with German connections, the
ones who now seemed to matter. The one group that had certainly
supported the Soviet annexation of Lithuania, members of the Lithuanian
Communist Party, were actually allowed to join the Lithuanian Activist
Front—provided that they were not Jews. Non-Jewish communists were
thus free to switch sides and thereby obliviate their Soviet collaboration.
Lithuanian communist youth held in prison were told that the price of
freedom was a certain demonstration of loyalty to their country: They had
to kill one Jew. Jewish communists, like Jews in general, could not join
the Lithuanian Activist Front. No matter how patriotic or loyal to
Lithuania a Jew might have been, he was now excluded from Lithuanian
politics. In summer and fall 1941, large numbers of Jews who had little to
do with the Soviet occupation were murdered by large numbers of

Lithuanians who had participated in it.
Where the Soviets had annihilated a nation-state, the Judeobolshevik
myth functioned better than the Germans expected. For Nazis,
Judeobolshevism was a description of the world, and Lithuanians who
could be motivated to kill Jews were minor assistants in the healing of the
planet. Any political promises were, of course, meant in bad faith. The
German suggestion that killing Jews was part of a political transaction
was mendacious. By the end of 1941, the Germans had banned all
Lithuanian organizations. The political resource had been consumed. At
that point, almost all of the Jews of Lithuania were dead.
For the Lithuanians themselves there was, of course, a deeper politics,
invisible to the Germans. If the Jews were to blame for communism, then
the Lithuanians could not have been. Individual Lithuanians who killed
Jews were undoing their individual past under the Soviet regime.
Lithuanians as a collectivity were erasing the humiliating, shameful past
in which they had allowed their own sovereignty to be destroyed by the
Soviet Union. The killing created a psychological plausibility with which
it was difficult to negotiate: Since Jews had been killed they must have
been guilty, and since Lithuanians had killed they must have had a
righteous cause.
Double collaboration in Lithuania was the rule rather than the
exception. The Germans were encountering a Sovietized population that
they did not meaningfully alter before some of its members began killing
Jews. The Lithuanian soldiers who answered the call from the Lithuanian
Activist Front to rebel were deserting from their Red Army units. The
Lithuanian policemen who melted into the woods as anti-Soviet partisans
had just been serving the Soviets and carrying out Soviet policies of
repression. The Germans had neither the will nor the personnel to purge
all of the hundreds of local administrations that had just been serving the
Soviets—and certainly could not have done so in the brief time between
their own arrival and the outbreak of anti-Jewish violence. The whole
point of anti-Jewish violence, from a Lithuanian perspective, was to
demonstrate loyalty before the Germans had time to figure out who had
actually collaborated with the Soviets.
The Germans never did much alter the local administration; in general,
the same people who enacted Soviet policy now enacted German policy.

The Germans were concerned with removing top-level Soviet
collaborators, but here they were rather hapless. Jonas Dainauskas, an
officer of the prewar Lithuanian security police, had worked for the Soviet
NKVD. When the Germans arrived he met with Franz Walter Stahlecker,
the commander of Einsatzgruppe A, to arrange the participation of his
men in the killing of Jews. Juozas Knyrimas, who had worked to help the
Soviets deport Lithuanian citizens, now joined the Lithuanian police and
killed Jews. Jonas Baranauskas, who had worked for the Soviet police,
joined the Lithuanian partisans and killed Jews.
—
Vilnius, the Jerusalem of Lithuania, was home to nearly a hundred
thousand Jews. Vilnius had been the Lithuanian capital between
December 1939, when it was granted to Lithuania after the Soviet
invasion of Poland, and June 1940, when the Soviet Union occupied and
then annexed Lithuania. Between June 1940 and June 1941, it was the
capital of the Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic. But throughout all of
these political incarnations Vilnius was, in its population, a city of Poles
and Jews. The Lithuanian Activist Front was more concerned with the
Poles than the Jews in Vilnius, and tried with no success to persuade its
German patrons that the Polish problem should be the higher priority. In
fact, the Germans used Lithuanians to rid Vilnius of Jews. By July 1941,
the main killing site was the Ponary Forest, just beyond the city. The
murder operations there were led by Dr. Alfred Filbert, the commander of
Einsatzkommando 9, and one of the young intellectuals of the SS.
Filbert’s men began very early to shoot Jewish women and children as
well as Jewish men.
This innovation took place under the pressure of failure on the
battlefield. If the Judeobolshevik myth worked as politics in lands where
the Soviets had destroyed the state, it failed as the basis for a military
strategy. The Germans were facing difficulties on the battlefield that the
Lithuanians could not grasp and that they themselves could not admit.
The Soviet Union had not collapsed like a “house of cards” or a “giant
with feet of clay.” Lithuania was the hinterland of Army Group North,
which in the first weeks of the war was seen by Hitler, the author of those
phrases, as the most important. The commanders of Army Group North

were quite aware that their advance to Leningrad was not going as
quickly as anticipated. By August 1941, Hitler was signaling to some of his
closest collaborators, in the most indirect of ways, that the war was not
going as planned. In Germany, Jews over the age of six were required to
wear the Star of David that September, signifying their responsibility for
the lost momentum of the military campaign. They were marked as
hostages to the success of German soldiers, an extraordinary shift of
responsibility that would be followed to its logical conclusion.
If the Soviet Union could not be brought down by a rapid attack against
Jews, then Germany would have to be defended by a systematic campaign
against the Jews under German control. Army commanders dropped
whatever reservations they might have had about the activities of the
Einsatzgruppen. Himmler began to order the murder of Jewish women
and children. There was some difficulty in practice with this, even for
some SS officers. Stahlecker, the commander of Einsatzgruppe A and
thus the immediate superior of Filbert, recognized that the murder of
civilians was an “emotional strain.” Extra alcohol was given to German
men who shot Jewish children, but this was not enough. Commanders
had to explain to their men why they should violate a basic taboo. Though
evidence of what they said is sketchy, educated SD officers such as
Filbert, a doctor of law, presumably transmitted and adapted ideas
making the rounds back in Germany. In the Nazi press, a key idea from
Hitler’s My Struggle was brought to public attention in July 1941: that
the Jews must be annihilated because they wish to kill all Germans. This
notion then quickly appeared in correspondence between the German
executioners and their families: The enemy must be exterminated
because his goal is our extermination; the children we murder suffer less
than the children the Soviets murder. The killers seemed to be taking
refuge in the idea that it was the enemy that was guilty of total policies of
extermination, to which their deeds were nothing more than local selfdefense. It took Einsatzkommandos such as Filbert’s a few weeks to shift
from killing a few women and older children to killing them all.

Their hesitations about murdering women and children motivated
Germans to recruit local people. Filbert expanded the remit of the
Einsatzkommando by engaging local Lithuanians, Poles, and Russians to
assist in the shooting. Most of the men he recruited had been in the Red
Army, and so had something to prove. Filbert himself had an unusual
appreciation of these complex motivations, the need to overcome
shadows from the past. He knew that not all communists were Jews,
since his own brother was a communist who spent the war in German
camps.
—
The Germans had come to understand that pogroms were not an effective
way to eliminate Jews, but that the production of lawlessness was an
appropriate way to find murderers who could be recruited for organized
actions. Within weeks they grasped that people liberated from Soviet rule
could be drawn into violence for psychological, material, and political
reasons. Local people who returned with the Germans brought and
amplified the German message that liberation from the Jews was the only
liberation on offer, and a precondition for any further political
discussions. People who had fled Soviet occupation for Berlin and new
recruits in the country itself could be used in this way as translators.
Local collaborators added, perhaps for their own purposes, the
proposition that killing a Jew would remove the stain of Soviet
collaboration. In this way, in June and July 1941, the German
entrepreneurs of violence found the way to exploit the available postSoviet resources.
The Nazi conviction that Jews were inhuman and east Europeans were
subhuman could not provide anything like a technique to destroy the
former and subjugate the latter. Only through politics could people be
brought to do what the Germans could not do on their own: physically
eliminate large numbers of Jews in a very brief period of time. Lithuania
had shown what was politically possible; Latvia would reveal what was
technically feasible. As with Lithuania, the Soviet destruction of the
Latvian state in June 1940 opened an enormous political opportunity for
the Germans, providing them with a pool of refugees from which to

recruit. The Germans began their occupation of Latvia with about three
hundred Latvians of their own choosing. One of these was the former
head of the Latvian political police, whom they reinstalled. As in
Lithuania, the arrival of the Germans was accompanied by a multimedia
propaganda campaign in the local language. Newspapers published
gruesome photos of prisoners killed by the NKVD, identifying the victims
as Latvians and the perpetrators as Jews. Radio announcements and
newspaper reports in the Latvian language associated the Soviet regime
with the Jews, and liberation with their removal from Latvia.
By now Stahlecker, the commander of Einsatzgruppe A, had found a
formula. As always the idea was, as he put it, to “make it appear that the
indigenous populations reacted naturally” in attacking Jews and “carried
out these measures of [their] own accord.” He spoke of the need for
“channeling” the experience of Soviet occupation into pro-German
actions. As in Lithuania, the purpose of the local-language propaganda,
delivered by media and by word of mouth, was to dig that channel.
Stahlecker treated the pogroms that the Germans inspired as a kind of
recruiting exercise. The result was a new model in doubly occupied
Latvia: a shooting commando led by locals who, following German
orders, would perform most of the killing. Its leader, Viktors Bernhard
Arājs, would become one of the most accomplished mass murderers in
the history of Europe.
—
Arājs was born in the Russian Empire in 1910 to a mother who spoke
German and to a father who was repressed by Soviet authorities after the
October Revolution. Like Stahlecker and other German mass murderers,
Arājs was trained as a lawyer. He enrolled in law school in independent
Latvia in 1932 and then joined the police two years later to pay the bills.
He married an older woman for money to continue his studies, and then
took a younger lover. When he returned to law school just before the war,
he earned good marks in English constitutional law. His studies
continued after the Soviets occupied and annexed Latvia. He adapted his
biography to their ideological matrix, emphasizing in his applications to
continue his studies his humble background and the journeyman labor he
had performed. He earned his degree in Soviet Latvia, and therefore in

Soviet law, with coursework on the Stalin constitution. He seems to have
had some sympathy for the Soviet project and even for a time to have
thought of himself as a communist. Then an employer he liked was
repressed. As the Soviets retreated from the Germans in summer 1941,
they seem to have killed Arājs’s lover and her family. It is unclear whether
he knew this at the time, or would have cared.
The major theme of the private and the public life of Arājs was social
advancement. He served three quite different systems: the Latvian, the
Soviet, and the German. He showed no sign of being pro-communist until
the Soviets arrived, just as he showed no sign of being pro-Nazi until the
Germans arrived. Indeed, as a policeman in independent Latvia he had
arrested members of illegal right-wing groups. Arājs was able, perhaps by
chance or perhaps by prior arrangement, to make contact with Stahlecker
right after the German forces arrived. Stahlecker’s personal translator
was a German from Latvia who had known Arājs in the Latvian army
before the war. Arājs and Stahlecker spoke on the first and second of July
1941, as anti-Jewish violence was under way in Riga. On July 3, Arājs and
his men were already making their first arrests of Jews. The next day,
they were burning the synagogues of Riga.
In Riga, Arājs was allowed to use the house of a Jewish banking family
as his headquarters. The bankers had been expropriated and deported—
not by the Germans, but by the Soviets. The wealthier Jews were already
in the Gulag when the Germans arrived. This created a rather special
material resource. Besides disposing of property rights as such, the
Soviets had disposed of many of the property owners. If prior Jewish
owners were still physically present, as some were, they would never
regain their property under the Germans. If Jews even made a gesture
toward Sovietized possessions they were treated by the Germans as
looters. Non-Jewish inhabitants of Latvia—Latvians, Germans, and
others—reasoned the way many people do in such situations: The only
way to be sure about keeping stolen property is to make sure that no one
with a legal claim can ever appear again. What had been the Sovietization
of Jewish property now became, under the Germans, its Latvianization.
The Germans, even as they claimed choice properties such as the banker
family’s house, could not possibly oversee this process throughout the
country. The combination of Soviet expropriation and Nazi antisemitism
created a clear material incentive for non-Jews to murder Jews.

On July 4, 1941, Arājs published advertisements, worded quite vaguely,
encouraging Latvians to register for a new auxiliary police unit that would
work for the Germans. He made no mention of Jews. Many of his first
recruits were Red Army soldiers who had been soldiers of the Latvian
army before that. Very likely these were men who wished to undo the
double shame of losing Latvian independence and wearing the Soviet
uniform. Volunteers who had served in the Soviet militias were probably
also hoping to cleanse themselves of a Soviet past. Arājs also recruited
with some success, following instructions from Stahlecker, among
Latvians who had a grievance against Soviet rule. One new recruit, for
example, had seen his parents deported by the Soviets. The largest age
group among the new auxiliary policemen was between sixteen and
twenty-one. For many such young people, the prior year of Soviet
occupation, one way or another, must have been a decisive experience.
Most of the new auxiliary policemen were working class. None of the first
recruits knew in advance that his major duty would be to shoot Jews.
Many of them did not volunteer at all, but were transferred from the
regular police because the initial number of volunteers was insufficient.
Certainly not all of these people were Latvian nationalists. Some of them
were Russians.
The Arājs Kommando, the brainchild of Stahlecker, was overseen by
his subordinates Rudolf Batz and Rudolf Lange. They taught its members
how to assemble Jews and shoot them, and then passed responsibility for
the killing to Arājs. He and his men shot Riga Jews in the forest of
Bikernieki beyond the city. Then they traveled by an infamous blue bus
throughout the countryside for six months, between July and December
1941, killing the Jews of the towns and villages. Of the sixty-six thousand
or so Jews living in Latvia in summer 1941, the Arājs Kommando shot
about twenty-two thousand, and then assisted in the killing of some
twenty-eight thousand more. Like other murderers serving German
policy, and like the German murderers themselves, they killed whom they
were assigned to kill. Like all of the mass murderers of Jews, they also
murdered non-Jews. As they moved through the country, they shot
patients of psychiatric hospitals, for example. After most of the Latvian
Jews had been killed, the Arājs Kommando was dispatched to combat
Soviet partisans, which in practice meant shooting Belarusian civilians.
Throughout all of this, Arājs was personally troubled that his legal

credentials, assembled under Latvian and Soviet rule, were no longer
valid. After his career of mass murder, he returned to university at Riga,
where he completed a German degree in law.
—
The Einsatzgruppen were a hybrid institution, serving a state that was
defined in racial terms, following ambiguous orders that allowed some
room for maneuver. In Germany itself, the Einsatzgruppen existed only
in training academies. Beyond Germany, they murdered and they
pioneered. The Arājs Kommando represented a major innovation,
developed within two weeks of the invasion itself: the organized use of
substantial numbers of armed locals under German command to find,
assemble, and kill Jews. Before the invasion there had been no thought of
arming local people for any purpose; indeed, Hitler had explicitly
forbidden this. Stahlecker and other commanders quickly saw and
exploited the psychological, material, and political resources they
inherited from the Soviets, thereby moving towards Hitler’s grand design.
By August 6, 1941, Stahlecker was able to contemplate “the unique
possibility of a radical treatment of the Jewish question in the Ostraum,”
the East.
Aside from the Einsatzgruppen, the other German hybrid institution
operative in the East was the Higher SS and Police Leaders. These men
commanded both SS and police forces in a given zone of the occupied
Soviet Union, bringing together racial and state organizations. In
Germany, the Higher SS and Police Leaders had next to no meaning, but
in the occupied Soviet Union they were Himmler’s key subordinates.
They reported directly to him, just as the Einsatzgruppen commanders
reported directly to Heydrich. They, too, were expected to learn,
experiment, and innovate. For example, Himmler could tell Friedrich
Jeckeln, the Higher SS and Police Leader for Southern Russia (in
practice, Ukraine), that Jewish children and women were to be shot, as he
seems to have done on August 12, 1941. Just how this would be achieved
was to be decided on the spot.
Jeckeln was the outstanding entrepreneur of violence among the
Higher SS and Police Leaders. By the end of August 1941, he had
determined that essentially all German units, be they SS, police, or army,

could take part in mass coordinated shootings of Jews. Jeckeln’s
operations would show that even Germans who had no special
preparation could participate in mass murder on a truly titanic scale.
Jeckeln’s innovation was a result of the unexpected appearance of
stateless Jewish refugees from Czechoslovakia in a zone of Soviet Ukraine
under German occupation. The history of their death, which is also the
history of the emergence of industrial killing, began years earlier with the
destruction of their state. As Czechoslovakia was disassembled in 1938
and 1939, Czechoslovak Jews lost protection from their state. When
Germany annexed the “Sudetenland” in November 1938, the Jews there
either fled and abandoned their property or found themselves secondclass citizens of the German Reich. Between November 1938 and March
1939, Jews were still citizens of the new truncated republic of CzechoSlovakia. In March 1939, when Hitler moved to complete the destruction
of the Czechoslovak state, these Jews were divided into different
communities of fate. Jews from Bohemia and Moravia found themselves
in a Protectorate where only Germans were granted citizenship, subjected
to the racial laws of the Reich. Jews of Slovakia found themselves at the
mercy of lawmakers of a newly independent Slovak state.

The easternmost part of Czechoslovakia, Subcarpathian Ruthenia,
underwent a different history. In October and November 1938, Germany
had forced Czechoslovakia to cede southern Slovak territories as well as
some of Subcarpathian Ruthenia to Hungary. In March 1939, when
Czechoslovakia was completely dismantled, Hungary was granted the rest
of the region. The Jews of Subcarpathian Ruthenia fell under Hungarian
law. Jewish professionals and tradesmen were required to seek licenses,
which often led to their losing their livelihoods. To become Hungarian
citizens, Jews had to show that they or their families had been subjects of
the Hungarian crown in 1918. In fact, Hungarian officials were instructed
to treat Jews as “suspicious elements” regardless of what documents they
assembled. Jews went to great trouble and expense to demonstrate their
connection to the prior Hungarian state, but were excluded from state
protection anyway. Hungary deported Jews and others from its new
territories to Poland and to Slovakia as best it could beginning in March
1939. Not long after Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941,
Hungary began to deport populations regarded as undesirable, including
but not limited to the Jews, to areas of Soviet Ukraine under German
occupation.
Hungary made Jews stateless, and Germany killed them. What from
the perspective of Budapest was an ethnic cleansing campaign became for
Jeckeln the impulse towards a policy of industrial-scale killing. On
August 26 and 27, 1941, Jeckeln oversaw a mass shooting operation in
Kamianets’ Podils’kyi designed to eliminate these stateless Jews who had
been removed from Czechoslovak protection and excluded from the
Hungarian state, as well as thousands of other local Jews. Vladimir P., for
example, was from a family of local Jews. They were Soviet citizens who
had experienced the risks and opportunities of the communist regime for
two decades. His father had survived an arrest by the NKVD but did not
escape the Germans. Vladimir himself slipped away only because he knew
a local police officer, an acquaintance from Soviet times; all local
collaborators, like all local victims, had been Soviet citizens. Vladimir’s
family were among the 23,600 Jews assembled and shot. The episode
began with the conventional Nazi association of the communist and the
Jew. Jeckeln chose a Jewish man at random and called him “Béla Kun,”
the name of the founder of a short-lived communist state in Hungary.
If the Judeobolshevik symbolism was the same for the pogroms and the

mass killings, the scale and method were new. Crucially, Jeckeln learned
that German Order Policemen would carry out mass shootings of
thousands of innocent people who had not even been charged with a
crime. For about half of the Order Policemen who served in the Soviet
Union, the first stateless zone had been Poland after 1939. Such men had
experience in murder of one kind or another. But roughly half came
straight from Germany to the occupied USSR. The policemen learned to
kill Jews very quickly, some writing letters home within weeks in which
they took for granted the necessity of the murder of all Jews. The
Germans themselves probably did not expect such rapid selfradicalization. Order Police officers quickly came to outnumber the
Einsatzgruppen by a factor of ten: Some thirty-three thousand were on
site by the end of 1941. Policemen carried out more shootings than
members of the Einsatzgruppen; no mass shooting in the East would
take place without them. At Kamianets’ Podils’kyi, Jeckeln also
demonstrated that the Wehrmacht would assist with supplies and
coordination. In uniting SS, regular police, and soldiers, he developed a
triumvirate that would persist in mass murder throughout the war.
Jeckeln’s second major demonstration was in Kyiv, which had been the
capital of Soviet Ukraine since 1934. Here the occasion for industrialscale murder was not the unexpected appearance of stateless Jewish
refugees but the surprise of Soviet sabotage. The Soviets had left bombs
on timers in several major buildings in downtown Kyiv, which caused
explosions that killed German officials and officers. This act of Soviet
resistance was an opportunity for the Germans to claim and then stage
Judeobolshevism. If the Soviets had attacked Germans, then Jews had to
be held responsible.
On September 28, 1941, the German army printed and posted notices
requiring Jews to appear at a certain intersection in western Kyiv with
their documents and their valuables on the following day. Most of the
Jews who had remained in Kyiv obeyed the order. People gathered early,
before dawn, thinking that they would get the best seats on the trains.
Elderly women wore strings of onions around their necks, food for the
journey. Yom Kippur, the day of atonement, was on the morrow; people
told themselves that they would be safe. At the screening point at the
intersection non-Jews who had accompanied their families or friends
were told to return home, and most did. From that point forward the

Jews walked in a cordon made by German police and dogs to a ravine at
Babyi Iar, where the German army had prepared trenches for mass
shootings. There Germans, assisted by local collaborators, shot some
33,761 Jews over pits. They took some young Jewish women aside to be
raped first. Jeckeln was improving upon his technique of killing. He now
deployed what he called the “sardine method,” in which people were
forced to lie down in careful rows in a pit before they were shot. The next
group was then forced to lie directly upon that layer of corpses, and so on.
Once a pit was full, a German would tread over the pile of corpses,
looking for signs of life, and firing bullets downward. This form of
industrial murder, which allowed more than ten thousand individuals to
be shot on a single day, was Jeckeln’s personal invention. After the
successful trial at Babyi Iar, he invited the Order Policemen who had
assisted in the preparations to a drinking party where he explained the
political logic of murder.
Many of the aged and infirm among Kyiv’s Jews had been unable to
gather as instructed by the posters printed by the German army. After the
murder of their families and friends, they were left alone, helpless, in
their apartments with their possessions. Some of them were then killed
by their neighbors, until recently their fellow Soviet citizens, who took
their property for themselves. In Soviet conditions multiple families
crowded together in a single apartment, which meant that empty
apartments were in high demand. Some of the pogromists in Kyiv were
Soviet citizens who had suffered under Stalinism and who blamed the
Jews. Very likely others were people who used the idea of
Judeobolshevism as a retroactive justification of their own robbery.
Throughout Europe, the murder of Jews created opportunities for theft,
which in turn created a felt need for moral justification.
At the end of 1941, the murderous innovations were brought together.
In November 1941, Jeckeln was transferred by Himmler from Ukraine to
be the Higher SS and Police Leader of Reichskommissariat Ostland,
which included Latvia. Ordered by Himmler to kill the remaining Jews of
Riga, Jeckeln brought together his own technique of mass shooting with
Stahlecker’s technique of organizing locals. Using Germans as the
shooters and the Arājs Kommando as the auxiliaries, Jeckeln had some
fourteen thousand Riga Jews killed at pits in the Letbarskii Forest outside
the city on November 30, 1941. The feat was repeated on December 8,

1941. The killing technology on display was conceived after the invasion,
in the zone of consecutive occupation, by the Nazi entrepreneurs of
violence.
Hundreds of thousands of Jewish children, women, and men were shot
behind the lines, on what had been Soviet territory, as the German army
battled the Red Army. The method of killing was perfected in late 1941, as
the German attack upon the supposedly Jewish state was halted. The war
on the Jews was being won, as the war against the USSR was being lost.
The state destroyers of the SS could say that they were succeeding where
all others had failed.

7
Germans, Poles, Soviets, Jews

“The East belongs to the SS!” So Heinrich Himmler liked to exclaim, and
in a certain way he was right. It was not easy for the German civilian
administrators, the men responsible for the zones known as
Reichskommissariat Ostland and Reichskommissariat Ukraine, to
exploit local laborers while stealing their food. Nor did it prove a simple
task for the Wehrmacht to defeat the Red Army. The destruction of
previous state authority gave Himmler’s SS men a demonstrably
achievable task in the military campaign and in the occupation. Clearing
away previous institutions did not enable quick victory or colonization,
but it did make possible the extermination of Jews. In the zone where the
SS destroyed Soviet state structures, the vague concept of a Final Solution
of the Jewish “problem” could become the specific project of killing Jews
where they lived.
Himmler’s subordinates, entrepreneurs of violence such as Stahlecker
and Jeckeln, learned to exploit the resources left by Soviet rule, and
invented the techniques they needed. It was already known that
Einsatzgruppen could kill tens of thousands of people in cold blood; this
they had done to Polish citizens in 1939. It was learned in 1941 that other
Germans, with less training and weaker ideological preparation, could
also kill in the tens of thousands. It transpired after June 1941 that almost
every German who was ordered to shoot a civilian, Jewish or otherwise,
would obey that order—even though asking to be spared from such duties
brought no consequences beyond peer pressure. Although local
populations disappointed Germans by not rising up as mindless hordes
against local Jews, tens of thousands of local people could be recruited to
auxiliary police or special commandos that, among other tasks, would

shoot Jews in large numbers. With this learning and these instruments in
place, Himmler could travel through the occupied Soviet Union in August
1941 and urge the German forces who were slower to kill to keep up with
those who were setting the pace. By September 1941, the killing shifted
from shootings of Jewish men of military age to massacres of entire
Jewish populations.
The invasion of summer 1941 was a special encounter of Nazi
expectations with Soviet experiences. The more drastic the Soviet assault
on prior politics, the greater the political resource, and the more
extensive the field for Nazi innovation. Yet what the Germans learned
about themselves and others turned out to have some application beyond
the special zone of consecutive occupation where the Holocaust began.
The double destruction of the state created the conditions for the crucial
innovations. Once the concept of a Final Solution became the practice of
mass murder, the new techniques of murder could be applied to the east
of the zone, in the prewar Soviet Union.
Organized massacres involving multiple German institutions with local
assistance began in the zone where the Soviets destroyed the interwar
state and the Germans drove out Soviet power. The Germans continued
the practice, with comparable success, in the lands that had been part of
the USSR before 1939: prewar Soviet Belarus, prewar Soviet Ukraine, and
prewar Soviet Russia. The death rate of Jews in the lands of the prewar
Soviet Union occupied by Germany (95 percent) was almost as high as
that in the doubly occupied lands where Soviet occupation of other
sovereign states preceded German occupation (97 percent). Soviet
citizens collaborated in the mass murder of Jews, regardless of whether
they received Soviet passports in 1939 and 1940 or had spent their lives
under Soviet rule. Communists collaborated with the Germans regardless
of whether their party cards had been stamped a year or a decade before.
There were, of course, some differences. Only in the prewar Soviet Union,
it seems, did officers of the Soviet NKVD volunteer for the German police
in order to kill enemies behind the front. Naturally, such people had to
take part in the mass shootings of Jews, since not doing so would have
drawn attention.
The Germans reached the prewar Soviet Union within a matter of
weeks, but by then they had already learned from experience. By the time
SS officers reached the prewar Soviet Union, they knew that the failure of

the pogrom strategy did not really matter. In Estonia, the northernmost
of the three Baltic states, and the last to be conquered, no pogroms at all
were instigated—and yet almost all of the Jews who had not fled were
found and killed by the Estonian Security Police under German authority.
Pogroms did break out in the prewar Soviet Union, but usually in the
aftermath of mass shooting rather than as a prelude. The Germans knew
that they could exploit the local Soviet administrations, and they knew
that they could recruit enough young men.
The prewar Soviet Union was far poorer than the Baltic states and even
than eastern Poland, so every bit of property was all the more valued.
Soviet policy in the annexed territories in 1939 and 1940 had created
uncertainty about property; Soviet policy in the prewar Soviet Union had
created widespread misery. Jews who lived in the lands of the prewar
Soviet Union were farther to the east and therefore had more time to flee
the German advance. This created a huge supply of houses and
apartments, promptly appropriated by their Soviet neighbors. The very
fact that some Jews were already gone and their residences already taken
by others when the Germans arrived prompted the thought that more
property would be available if the remaining Jews were removed. The
acquisitive and the ruthless came to the fore. Soviet citizens were already
classified by nationality in their internal passports, and Soviet culture was
already one of ethnic denunciations. There had been no Jewish operation
among the national operations of the Great Terror of 1937 and 1938. But
the denunciatory frenzy had reached Jews nonetheless. In the interwar
Soviet Union, Soviet Jews were accused of ritually murdering children
and young women. In Moscow, Kharkiv, and Minsk, among other places,
Soviet citizens partook in the blood libel. In Minsk, the man who accused
Jews of ritual murder for Passover “to bake matzah” was a worker and a
member of a communist party. This was in the capital of a Soviet republic
in 1937, just as the Great Terror was beginning.
In an unhappy sequence, Soviet mass terror (1937–1938) was followed
by an alliance with Nazi Germany (1939–1941), and then an invasion by
Nazi Germany (1941). In the lands that German forces first reached after
crossing through the new Soviet territories, in western Soviet Belarus and
western Soviet Ukraine, the Great Terror had taken some three hundred
thousand lives. Because shootings and deportations had removed much
of the Polish minority from precisely this region, local Ukrainians,

Belarusians, and Russians had already seen a minority removed from
their midst by state policy. The major settlements of Jews in the western
Soviet Union had also been, almost without exception, major settlements
of Poles. In 1939 and 1940, the Soviet alliance with Nazi Germany sowed
ideological confusion among Soviet citizens. The Soviet press ceased to
criticize German policies and began to publish Nazi speeches. Soviet
citizens in public meetings occasionally misspoke, praising “Comrade
Hitler” when they meant “Comrade Stalin” or calling for “the triumph of
international fascism.” Swastikas began to appear as graffiti in Soviet
cities. When the Germans arrived in 1941, Soviet citizens who had
denounced their Polish neighbors for their apartments three years before
presumably had little hesitation about denouncing their Jewish ones.
Soviet citizens—Russians, Ukrainians, Belarusians, and others—did hand
over their Jewish neighbors to the Germans. The experience of running
the errand of denunciation must have been very much the same. In Kyiv,
Ukrainians and Russians helped the German Order Police find and
register Jews before the mass shooting at Babyi Iar. Afterwards, the
German police received the denunciations in what had been NKVD
headquarters.
The Judeobolshevik myth, which worked as politics in the doubly
occupied territories, could be applied with similar results when the
Germans reached the prewar Soviet Union. Once developed, this
technique of separating Jews from others could be applied anywhere in
the Soviet space. The fact of past Soviet rule and the clarity of German
anti-Jewish stereotypes combined to create an easy and callous excuse for
murder, from the top of the system to the bottom. A Ukrainian policeman
in the Galician town of Wiśniowiec could stop a Jew on the street and ask
him: “Tell me, my friend, what did you do under the Soviet regime?” and
then beat him regardless of the answer. The beating was the answer. As in
the doubly occupied lands, in the prewar Soviet Union Jews were
sacrificed for the holy lie of the collective innocence of others. In the end,
it mattered little, from the Jewish perspective, whether a given territory
had been ruled by the Soviets for a matter of decades or for a matter of
months. Either way, Jews present on these territories when the Germans
arrived were going to suffer and die.
—

In doubly occupied western Ukraine, the Germans could exploit the
aspirations of Ukrainians to a national state. They could try to put to use
the frustrations of two decades of Polish rule and two years of Soviet rule.
In central and eastern Ukraine, under Soviet rule for two decades,
nationalism had far less resonance. Although the Germans brought west
Ukrainian nationalists with them, these collaborators found few
interlocutors and were not usually instrumental in German policies in
central and eastern Ukraine. Nevertheless, the killing of the Jews took
place with the same efficiency.
In Zhytomyr, the major city of northwestern Soviet Ukraine, there was
no memory of a recent Soviet occupation, but rather experience of two
decades of Soviet rule. No deportations were under way when the
Germans arrived, as had been the case in the lands the Soviets had
annexed in 1939 and 1940. But, as in the doubly occupied regions, the
NKVD had been holding Soviet citizens in prisons in the vicinity. In a
number of cases the NKVD shot prisoners and left the corpses behind. As
the inhabitants of Zhytomyr suspected, these very prisons had been sites
of a much larger Soviet killing campaign not long before. In September
1938, the Red Army had gathered precisely in the Zhytomyr region as
Soviet leaders spoke of a fraternal rescue of Czechoslovakia by way of an
invasion of Poland. The NKVD meanwhile murdered large numbers of
civilians, especially Polish men. The NKVD shot more than four hundred
Soviet citizens in the area on the day that the Munich accords were
signed, removing the occasion for war and an intervention in Poland.
When war came a year later, the Soviet Union was an ally of Nazi
Germany rather than an enemy; inhabitants of the Zhytomyr region, like
all Soviet citizens, were then treated to almost two years of praise of
Hitler’s regime. This was followed from June 1941 by the Nazis’ own
propaganda: leaflets from airplanes equating Jews with communists.
When war came to Zhytomyr on July 9, 1941, in the form of a German
invasion, the men of the SS had already passed through the lands that the
Soviets had just annexed; they had their political formulas ready and
could be confident of success. Wherever the Germans found corpses left
by the NKVD, they blamed the Jews and usually shot some. On August 7,
1941, Sonderkommando 4a of Einsatzgruppe C undertook the simple
scenography in Zhytomyr. Its members shot two Jews accused of working
for the NKVD. Then they asked the gathered public, mostly Ukrainians

and Poles, “With whom do you have to settle a score?” The answer had
already been given. The crowd responded: “The Jews!”
In this way the bulk of the Soviet population was released from its past,
since essentially everyone in a city such as Zhytomyr had been associated
with the Soviet regime. By appearing at the shooting and participating in
an exchange with the German murderers, local people were doing their
part in a bloody revision of history and general assignation of blame to
the Jews. Here as everywhere, the lies and the killing were intimately
connected. Although the Judeobolshevik myth also functioned within the
Soviet Union itself, people in Zhytomyr generally knew that Jews were
not responsible for communism. But once Soviet citizens had said out
loud that Jews should be killed as punishment for communism, and
watched as Jews were in fact killed, they could hardly admit that they had
lied. In this way the killing itself drove forward the myth of
Judeobolshevism. Mendacity supported murder; murder supported
mendacity.
Kharkiv was the major city of northeastern Soviet Ukraine, near the
border with Soviet Russia, with a significant Russian minority. Its
inhabitants had suffered horribly in both the famine of 1932–1933 and in
the Great Terror of 1937–1938. As a boy from a Jewish family
remembered those years, “Every day kids would come over and say
‘Mom’s been arrested’ or ‘Dad’s been arrested.’ ” In Kharkiv, as elsewhere
in the prewar Soviet Union, arriving Germans were greeted with bread
and salt. The Germans relied upon local collaborators who were placed in
charge of largely unchanged local administrations. Although the Germans
did bring a few west Ukrainian nationalists to Kharkiv, the collaborators
were almost entirely Soviet citizens: Ukrainians, Russians, and others.
The Germans appointed a mayor to head the Kharkiv administration and
vice mayors for each of the city’s nineteen districts, whose borders
followed those of Soviet police precincts. Subordinate to the vice mayors
were the building supervisors, in general the same people performing the
same function that they had under Soviet rule: monitoring an apartment
house and reporting on its residents.
In any large Soviet city, the Germans could install a local authority
without Jews, but they could hardly manage without educated Soviet
citizens—who were often members of the communist party. For most of
the Soviet population, the equation of Jews with communism was highly

convenient, since it ethnicized Soviet history and thus liberated most
Soviet citizens of any guilt for Soviet practices. When the Kharkiv
Municipal Authority defined its role as “the final and utter defeat of the
Jew-Bolshevik gangsters,” it was expressing both the interest of the
Germans in pretending that they were conquering communism by killing
Jews and that of Soviet citizens in pretending that they had had nothing
to do with communism. The politics of the greater evil meant proclaiming
the destruction of Jewish communism while arranging for communists to
kill Jews.
When the Kharkiv Municipal Authority decreed its right to distribute
the property of Jews who had fled the German advance, it was
transforming a German war of conquest into the possibility of relative
social advancement for local Soviet citizens. Naturally, the capacity to
redistribute extended also to the property of any Jews who might
disappear for other reasons. The Kharkiv Municipal Authority ordered
the building supervisors to carry out a census of their buildings, placing
remaining Jews on a “yellow list.” In early December 1941, the building
supervisors created troikas to help them establish where the remaining
Jews lived. On December 14, an announcement appeared around the city
requiring Jews to report to a tractor factory the following day on pain of
death. The following day, a long and miserable procession of Jews walked
along Moskovs’kyi Prospekt, guided by local policemen and a few
Germans. One woman stopped at the side of the road and gave birth,
there and then, to twins; she and the babies were immediately shot. In
the barracks of the tractor factory Jews were guarded by their fellow
Kharkiv residents. These guards had the right to kill Jews, and sometimes
did. The building supervisors reported that their houses were free of Jews
and that apartments and movable property could be redistributed.
The mass shooting of the Jews of Kharkiv that began on December 27,
1941, was carried out by Germans: Sonderkommando 4a of
Einsatzgruppe C along with Security Police Battalion 314. By January 2,
1942, the men of these units had murdered some nine thousand people.
The bulk of the work that brought Jews to their places of death was done
by their fellow Soviet citizens, working within institutions that resembled
Soviet models and behaving much as they had under Soviet rule. A few of
the local authorities acted from political conviction as anti-communists.
Some residents of Kharkiv did hate Soviet rule as a result of the terror of

the late 1930s and the famine of the early 1930s. The main political lesson
of those experiences, however, had been submission. For the most part,
the people who made the murder of Jews possible were simply products
of the Soviet system, following a new line, adapting to a new master. The
hunt for surviving Jews, ordered by the mayor, was carried out under the
banner of the elimination of “Jewish-Communist and bandit-Bolshevik
trash.” This language is a hybrid of Soviet form and Nazi content.
No matter where the Germans arrived in the Soviet Union, the result
was essentially the same: the mass murder of Jews who remained,
planned by the Germans but achieved with much assistance from people
of all Soviet nationalities. The Judeobolshevik myth separated Jews from
other Soviet citizens and many Soviet citizens from their own pasts. The
murder of Jews and the transfer of property eliminated the sense of
responsibility for the past, creating a class of people who had gained from
the German occupation, and seeming to promise relative social advance
in a German future. Soviet Gypsies were not presented as an ideological
enemy to the same extent, and did not provide the same degree of
harmonization of German worldviews and local fears and needs. But they,
too, were murdered in the occupied Soviet Union, and their property was
also reallocated by the collaborating local administrations. In Kharkiv,
the Gypsies were rounded up at the horse market.
—
Kharkiv, though a Russian-speaking city, was one of the cradles of
Ukrainian culture; the same could not be said of the city named after the
leader of the Soviet Union. Stalino, the major industrial city of
southeastern Ukraine, known today as Donetsk, was something close to a
model Soviet city. Its coal mines and industry, although they predated the
Bolshevik Revolution, had been vastly expanded during Stalin’s First
Five-Year Plan of 1928–1933. Its hinterlands had been starved during the
famine of 1932–1933 and resettled by people from throughout the Soviet
Union. The growing city itself attracted workers from Soviet Russia and
elsewhere. Stalino was a Soviet melting pot, a Russian-speaking city
where Ukrainian national identity was far less present than in Kharkiv,
and perhaps less so than anywhere else in Soviet Ukraine. The political
identity seems to have been a Soviet one—if so, this was no more

hindrance to collaborating with the Germans than anything else. The
murder of Jews proceeded in Stalino much as elsewhere.
Because Army Group South of the Wehrmacht was slow to advance
across Soviet Ukraine, Soviet authority in Stalino and the surrounding
Donets Basin collapsed in stages rather than all at once. Communists tore
up their party cards in expectation of the German arrival. Peasants were
pleased because they expected that the Germans would abolish collective
farming. Local men were sent to the front; their families had time to
protest Soviet policies before the war came to Stalino. The NKVD tried to
plant explosives in the mines to be tripped when the Germans arrived;
women and children tried to stop this at Mine 4/21 in Stalino and were
shot. The Red Army took livestock from the countryside when it
retreated, and communist party members in Stalino absconded with food
that was meant for the general population. The local militias, largely
made up of miners, dispersed rather than fight the Germans. As the
German army reached the Donbas region, Einsatzgruppe C killed Jews,
sometimes alongside Gypsies, sometimes in mines.
In Stalino, as elsewhere, the stigmatization and murder of local Jews
permitted a bridge between occupiers and occupied. The Germans
quickly established a local administration in the city, headed by a
longtime communist and largely staffed by communists. These new
authorities recruited a local police force of some two thousand people,
many of whom had also been members of the communist party. These
local policemen assisted the Germans in the shooting of some fifteen
thousand Jews in Stalino. In some considerable measure, the murder of
Jews for their supposed communism was carried out by communists. By
murdering the Jews, the local people of Stalino, like local people
elsewhere, partook in a lie that emptied their own pasts of responsibility
while providing a measure of protection from German rule. Whereas
people in the doubly occupied lands were exorcising the specter of their
own participation in a Soviet regime that lasted for a year or two, in
places such as the Donbas the history that was evacuated was that of a
whole generation.
Later, when Soviet power returned, people switched sides again. From
that point forward the memory of typically Soviet places such as the
Donets Basin has been dominated by a Soviet myth of anti-fascism, in
which all Soviet citizens suffered equally under and struggled valiantly

against German rule. This is just as true, which is to say just as false, as
the wartime myth of anti-communism. The myth of Judeobolshevism in
1941 allowed Soviet citizens to separate themselves from their Jewish
neighbors; the myth of the Great Fatherland War against Nazi Germany
allowed them to separate themselves from their murder of their Jewish
neighbors.
—
Belarus was the European republic of the USSR most altered by Soviet
rule. It was a crucial test for German policy, since here—unlike in
Lithuania, Latvia, or even parts of Ukraine—there was no national
political resource. There was no meaningful Belarusian national question,
and only a few Belarusian nationalists were brought by the German
invaders from emigration or from one region of Belarus to another.
The initial German policy to Jews had been the same in Belarus as
elsewhere. Indeed, the German mass murder of Jewish women and
children began in Belarus on July 19, 1941, when Himmler ordered
Waffen-SS troops behind Army Group Center to clear the Pripiat
Marshes of Jews. On July 31, he indicated that the order included the
murder of women. The Waffen-SS murdered some 13,788 children,
women, and men. As of mid-August, Einsatzgruppe B, responsible for
Belarus, had killed more Jews than any other Einsatzgruppe. But Arthur
Nebe, its commander, had no recruitment opportunities comparable to
those of Stahlecker in Lithuania and Latvia, since in Belarus there was no
political resource. Local collaborators were generally Belarusians and
Poles, usually people lacking any political motivation. Nebe also had less
reinforcement by other German police units than Jeckeln to his south. In
September 1941, the killing of Jews in Belarus fell behind that in the
Baltics and in Ukraine.
With less local collaboration in the offing, the SS in Belarus in effect
recruited the German army. Whereas Soviet citizens could be recruited by
the equation of Bolsheviks and Jews, German army officers were
sensitive to a modified logic: the triple equation of Jews, Bolsheviks, and
partisans. If Jews were Bolsheviks, then a politically minded local might
take part in their killing in order to prove that he was not a Bolshevik
(and to profit from the dead Jew’s property). If Jews were partisans, then

German officers might want them dead in order to be able to fight a clean
and victorious war. The army, which could not steal very much immobile
property, also realized that killing Jews and allowing locals to take their
houses was a kind of social policy. On September 18, 1941, at Krupki,
northeast of Minsk, German soldiers of the Third Battalion of the 354th
Infantry Division chose the site for the killing of Jews, and escorted them
from the village to the awaiting SS. One soldier, presumably a father
himself, allowed a Jewish mother to step away from the column for a
moment to pull up her little boy’s pants.
Not long afterwards, German soldiers would murder Jews in Belarus
with no assistance from the SS. At a conference at Mahileu, where Army
Group Center of the Wehrmacht had made its headquarters, Nebe and
the Higher SS and Police Leader for the region, Erich von dem BachZelewski, briefed army officers on partisan warfare. They even organized
a demonstration. In a village where no partisans were actually found,
Germans killed thirty-two Jews, most of them women. The message
conveyed there was difficult to miss. Army officers reacted to the lessons
of the conference, which took place on September 23–24, in different
ways. But enough of them were willing or indeed eager to treat Jews as
partisans that the default behavior of the army seemed to change.
By October 1941, the second major German offensive in the east,
Operation Typhoon, was under way. There was never supposed to be a
second German offensive, since Operation Barbarossa, launched in June,
was expected to destroy the Soviet state by September. As terrifying as
the initial German advance had been, it was far slower than the Germans
had anticipated. The anxiety of delay was experienced first by Army
Group North, which did not reach Leningrad. Army Group South made
slower progress through Ukraine than expected. Hitler decided to send
part of Army Group Center to help Army Group South in September.
Once the breakthrough in Ukraine was achieved, Operation Typhoon was
to follow: a final push toward Moscow by a regrouped and reinforced
Army Group Center, gathering in Belarus almost two million soldiers.
Unlike Operation Barbarossa, which began in doubly occupied territory
and reached prewar Soviet territory, Operation Typhoon was to begin and
end in prewar Soviet territory. Nevertheless, it had the same basic
consequences for Jews. After German troops advanced on September 30,
1941, Soviet Belarus became a killing zone very much like the Baltics and

Ukraine. On October 2 and 3, Mahileu became the first sizable city in
Belarus where all of the Jews were killed. Even as the German army was
advancing east in huge numbers, the German killers presented their
actions as defensive. To shoot Jewish babies in Mahileu was, as one
German (Austrian) explained to his wife, to prevent something worse:
“During the first try, my hand trembled a bit as I shot, but one gets used
to it. By the tenth try I aimed calmly and shot surely at the many women,
children, and infants. I kept in mind that I have two infants at home,
whom these hordes would treat just the same, if not ten times worse. The
death that we gave them was a beautiful quick death, compared to the
hellish torments of thousands and thousands in the jails of the GPU.
Infants flew in great arcs through the air, and we shot them to pieces in
flight, before their bodies fell into the pit and into the water.”

Once Operation Typhoon was under way, very little was needed to
induce German soldiers to murder Jews. The Third Company of the 691st
Regiment of the 339th Infantry Division had been serving the German
occupation in France, stationed in the Loire Valley. A few days after its
transfer to Belarus, on October 10, 1941, its men were sealing the village
of Krucha, marching its Jews to pits, and shooting them all. The soldiers
did not relish the task; the commanders seemed to wish to avoid the
appearance of weakness in their new assignment. Whatever the reason,
murder the soldiers did, although they were not punished if they asked to
be excused from the shooting. This army unit, freshly arrived from
French wine country, carried out the mass murder of the Jews of Krupki
by themselves, with no assistance from the SS.
In Minsk, the capital of prewar Soviet Belarus, the Germans revealed a
spectacular scenography of the Judeobolshevik myth. On November 7,
1941, the anniversary of the Bolshevik Revolution, Germans and local
Belarusians and Russians forced the Jews of Minsk to carry Soviet flags
and sing Soviet songs as they marched away from the city. Then the Jews
were shot. The symbolism was obvious to all: The Jews were responsible
for communism and for the Soviet Union; their elimination would mean
its defeat, and of course the excision of responsibility for everyone else.
The Germans repeated the performance in Minsk on other Soviet
holidays such as Red Army Day and International Women’s Day. As they
established a civilian administration in occupied Soviet Belarus they
could rely upon Soviet citizens, as they could in Soviet Ukraine and Soviet
Russia. In Belarus, communists and members of the Komsomol, the
communist youth group, joined the local police and took part in the mass
shooting of Jews and other German policies.
With the advance of Operation Typhoon, Belarus became the
hinterland of Army Group Center. With all of its swamps and forest,
Belarus was well suited to partisan warfare. Even before the Soviets
themselves grasped the utility of a partisan war behind the German lines,
Germans had found the new ideological cover for the anti-partisan
campaign to come: “a partisan is a Jew and a Jew is a partisan.” Jews
were first associated with the Soviet regime’s creation, then with its
predicted collapse, and then with an expected form of counterattack.
Although the Germans had announced that they would not be observing

the laws of war in the Soviet Union, and although German campaigns of
mass killing were obvious violations of these laws, they were enormously
sensitive to partisan campaigns directed against themselves. Any war by
the rules must be a war the Germans were winning; so, if the Germans
were not winning, someone else must be breaking the rules. Jews appear
in this logic as the iniquitous force that seeks to thwart Germans who are
struggling righteously for the triumph that nature owes them.
The policy of mass murder of Jewish women and children came slightly
later to Belarus, and the Germans found it no easier. Here as elsewhere
the imperative to kill women and children became an argument for
involving locals—or auxiliary policemen already recruited in Lithuania or
Latvia. It was also presumably one of the reasons that a new technique of
killing was applied. The method of mass murder by carbon monoxide,
already used in Germany and in occupied Poland against people deemed
“unworthy of life,” was applied in Belarus to Jews. Vans were adapted so
that they pumped their exhaust into their own hold. Packing Jews,
especially Jewish children, into these vans was a way to kill them without
facing them directly. The children called the vehicles “black ravens.” This
is what their parents had called the NKVD vehicles that had taken people
away during Stalin’s Great Terror three years before.
—
By the end of 1941, the Germans, with help from Soviet citizens, had
killed some one million Jews in the occupied Soviet Union. The
Einsatzgruppen had improvised techniques of killing and perfected their
political approach to local populations. Along with the Order Police and
the Wehrmacht, they were moving imperceptibly toward a full
implementation of the Judeobolshevik logic—which imperceptibly had
become a way of covering defeat rather than of bringing about victory.
They could not bring down the Soviet state, but they could kill Jews
where they had demolished Soviet institutions. Otto Rasch, the
commander of Einsatzgruppe C, noted in September 1941 that “the
elimination of the Jews” was “practically easier” than the general
campaign of colonial exploitation that had been the war’s original aim.
The war proceeded differently along different fronts, with
disappointment reaching first Army Group North, then Army Group

South, and then Army Group Center. But everywhere the commanders of
the Einsatzgruppen, Wehrmacht, and police knew that they were not as
far east as they were supposed to be. The policemen were available in
large numbers for killing Jews precisely because they could not fulfill
their original assignment, which had been to control the much larger
territory that was supposed to be conquered by the end of 1941. Army
commanders were anxious. Soviet resistance was real. Only the
Einsatzgruppen, and their SS commanders, seemed to have an answer: a
war against the Jews in fact as well as in name.
The national identities of the peoples of the Soviet Union, so important
to the mental world of German racists, and so prominent in later
polemics, made very little difference to their behavior. The Soviet state
was a barrier to German power, but no Soviet nation was. Jews died on
the territories of the prewar Soviet Union in much the same ways and in
much the same proportions as they did in the territories annexed by the
Soviet Union in 1939 and 1940. The Germans were aided in their
campaign of murder by members of all Soviet nationalities they
encountered. When the Germans crossed the border from one Soviet
republic to another, they paid little attention. Nor did they need to.
Whereas the Germans occupied Soviet Belarus and Soviet Ukraine in
their entirety for much of the war, some 95 percent of the territory of
Soviet Russia was spared German occupation. But in the parts of Soviet
Russia where German power did reach, Soviet citizens reacted much the
same way as Soviet citizens elsewhere. Russians who had been prominent
in the communist apparatus were informed by other Russians that they
could clear their slate if they killed one Jew. Russian house managers,
like house managers everywhere, provided the Germans with lists of Jews
in their buildings. Russians (and others) served the Germans as
policemen in Soviet Russia from the beginning. The Germans used
Russian policemen in anti-Jewish actions in Soviet Russia as soon as they
reached its territory. Russians in these auxiliary police forces tracked
down Jews in Pskov, Briansk, and Kursk. Russian policemen were
present at all of the mass shootings of Jews in occupied Soviet Russia,
such as Rostov and Mineral’nye Vody. Russian policemen, like policemen
everywhere, reported people who were hiding Jews in order to get their
property. Russians informed on one another everywhere, including in the
outskirts of besieged Leningrad. Russians were also present in the local

police forces that killed Jews beyond Russia, for example, in Vilnius,
Riga, Minsk, and Kharkiv.
In the cities of Soviet Russia that fell under German occupation, the
local politics and the fate of Jews were the same as in Soviet Ukraine or
Soviet Belarus. Army Group Center was held back for two months at
Smolensk in western Russia, finally winning an encirclement battle on
September 10, 1941. By this time, most of the local Jews, about ten
thousand people, had been able to flee. Their Russian neighbors, some of
whom had lost their own houses during the intense battle for the city,
looted the Jews’ property and took their apartments before the Germans
arrived. The appropriation of mobile and immobile property was brought
under control and regulated by the authorities installed by the Germans.
The initial plunder created an appetite for more. The collaborating local
administration of Smolensk, led by Russian communists with impressive
records of service to the Soviet Union, ordered a census to record the
place of residence of remaining Jews. They then provided the Germans
with the personnel needed to place these people in a ghetto. This allowed
the rapid seizure of the remaining Jewish property of the city. Once that
was achieved, the residences of the ghetto itself could become the next
object of desire. In May 1942, the Russian mayor, the noted Soviet jurist
Boris Men’shagin, suggested to the Germans that clearing the ghetto
would improve the living situation of Russians. Local Russian policemen
aided the Germans in murdering the remainder of the Jews of Smolensk
a few weeks later.
—
If the war had gone as Hitler had expected, the winter of 1941 would have
brought massive starvation throughout the western Soviet Union.
Instead, Jewish children were being gassed in vans as war continued. The
war of colonization against the Slavs, though it continued, was yielding to
the war of elimination of the Jews.
In nature, thought Hitler, conflict was over food, and the weaker races
were to starve. The objective of the Hunger Plan was precisely the
starvation of supposedly inferior Slavs. After the defeat of the Red Army
and the collapse of the Soviet state, food from the fertile parts of the
western Soviet Union, above all Soviet Ukraine, was to feed German

civilians. This reorganization of the European political economy was to
make Germany self-sufficient and Germans secure and comfortable.
Some thirty million Soviet citizens were supposed to starve in the winter
of 1941, among them six million inhabitants of Soviet Belarus. This failed.
Soviet citizens did indeed starve, and in large numbers: three million in
prisoner-of-war camps, a million in Leningrad, tens of thousands more in
Soviet Ukrainian cities such as Kharkiv and Kyiv. Yet the result was
barely sufficient to feed the German soldiers fighting on the eastern front,
and it did little to bring a new bounty home to Germany.
The German invasion of the USSR did create the possibility of
distributing the hunger. As German soldiers were ordered to feed
themselves and their animals (the Germans invaded with some 750,000
horses) from the land “like in a colonial war,” the allocation of the
foodstuffs that remained became a political problem. The result was the
invention of a new politics in 1941 and 1942: the redistribution not of
food in western and central Europe but of hunger in eastern Europe.
Unable to reward civilians in Germany with plentiful food, German policy
used food shortages to motivate peoples under their control and to
enforce their own racial hierarchies. As early as September 1941, the
Germans were no longer seeking to transform an entire region through
starvation, but rather to allocate hunger in such a way as to help them
win the war. People wanted Jewish property; they also wanted food
rations better than those of the Jews.
Like the politics of Judeobolshevism, the politics of relative deprivation
subdued resistance and generated collaboration. In the most drastic
cases, people killed quickly in order to avoid dying slowly. Once released
from starvation camps, Soviet prisoners of war were willing to do
anything to stay out, including aiding Germans in the policy of the mass
murder of Jews. Someone had to dig all of those pits. On December 7,
Soviet prisoners of war were digging pits in the Letbarskii Forest so that
Germans could shoot the Jews of Riga. Perhaps the Germans on the
scene regarded this as the control of the Judeobolshevik menace. And yet,
no matter how many battles the Germans seemed to win, and how many
prisoners they took, starved, or exploited, the Red Army kept fighting.
—

The autumn of 1941 was eventful for ten-year-old Yuri Israilovich
German. He was growing up in Kaluga, a city in Soviet Russia, about 190
kilometers southwest of Moscow. Two years earlier his father had
disappeared in the middle of the night, arrested by the NKVD on charges
of sabotage. A few weeks after the Germans invaded the Soviet Union, his
father returned, emaciated and exhausted, from hard labor in the Soviet
north. In September 1941, Yuri’s father was mobilized, despite his
condition, for the Red Army. With his father gone again, this time to fight
the Germans, Yuri began to feel, for the first time, that he was being
stigmatized as a Jew. A Russian neighbor said that the Germans would
“deal with” people like him when they arrived. When German troops did
reach the city in October 1941, Kaluga residents greeted them with bread
and salt. Very quickly a local administration, following German orders,
established a ghetto inside a cloister that had been closed under Soviet
rule. Yuri and other children were forced to work in the fields, and to dig
pits for murdered Jews. Some of the Jews inside the ghetto were shot,
including those regarded as disabled and a kind teacher who had tried to
help the children. Then, to everyone’s surprise, shells began to burst
around the city, and gunfire was heard. It was December 1941, and the
Red Army had returned. In haste, the Germans tried to liquidate the
ghetto, burning its buildings and shooting with machine guns at the Jews
who tried to escape. Yuri and his mother were among the few survivors.
They returned to their house, which had in the meantime been taken by
an Orthodox priest.
The battle for Kaluga was part of the astonishing counterattack of the
Red Army. In early December 1941, Soviet soldiers turned the tide at
Moscow. Operation Typhoon had failed. On December 7, a German
general, Hellmuth Stieff, wrote to his wife that he and his men were
“fighting here for our own naked lives, daily and hourly, against an enemy
who in all respects is far superior.”
That very day the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor, bringing the United
States into the war. The global strategic catastrophe allowed Hitler to slip
from one conception of his war to another. His very errors allowed him to
radicalize his rhetoric. His misunderstanding of Poland had brought him
a war with Britain. His underestimation of the Soviet Union meant that
Germany now had to fight the British, the Soviets, and the Americans—all
at once. Yet following the logic of his worldview, he could claim that the

“common front” of capitalism and communism against Germany was the
work of the Jews. A victory in the USSR might have allowed their
deportation. A stalemate in the East and a long global conflict required
something else. “The world war is here,” said Hitler on December 12,
1941, recalling his “prophecy” of January 1939. “The annihilation of the
Jews must be the necessary consequence.”
In the occupied zones of the Soviet Union in the preceding six months,
Germans had learned how this might be achieved: by mass shooting. By
the time Hitler promised to annihilate the Jews in December 1941, a
million Jews in the occupied Soviet Union had already been murdered.
Even so, Governor-General Hans Frank had no idea how the Polish Jews
packed into the ghettos of his General Government could be eliminated.
After listening to Hitler in Berlin in December 1941, he returned to
Cracow and spoke to his subordinates. “Gentlemen,” he began, “I must
ask you to rid yourselves of all feeling of pity. We must annihilate the
Jews wherever it is possible, in order to maintain the structure of the
Reich.” He had understood what Hitler could not say: that the struggle
was now defensive. The killing of the Jews was to substitute for a normal
acknowledgment of defeat.
The lessons of the USSR could not be applied in Poland, at least not in
the General Government and the lands annexed to the Reich, where
Germany had been exercising power since 1939. Germany had invaded
Poland more than two years earlier without beginning a Final Solution.
Einsatzgruppen had ravaged western and central Poland in 1939, but
mostly in the hunt for educated Poles. There had been no promises of
political liberation then, only the project of destroying the Polish state
forever. No Poles had been used as political collaborators: not because
none had offered (a few had), but because Berlin had no use for them.
Though the Polish police had been preserved, no thought was given to
arming enough Poles to carry out a Final Solution by shooting. Polish
Jews had been placed in ghettos in 1940 and 1941, not to kill them but to
prepare for some deportation. To be sure, tens of thousands of Jews had
died of disease or malnutrition in the ghettos. Still, two million Jews were
still alive in the western and central lands of Poland taken by Germany in
1939. How would these people be killed?

—
On January 30, 1942, Hitler spoke at the Berliner Sportpalast before
masses of Germans. He recalled again, now publicly, his “prophecy” of
January 30, 1939, issued right after his foreign minister had returned
with the news that Poland would not join Germany in the war against the
Soviet Union. He now misdated his “prophecy” to September 1, 1939, the
date of the German invasion of Poland. Hitler had seen back then, it
would seem, the logic of his own actions. If he won his war, he could
defeat the Jews. And if he lost his war, he could characterize it as a
planetary conflict and also defeat the Jews. In January 1942, he told
Germans that Jews were to be held responsible for a world war. His
“prophecy” would be fulfilled.
That same month, Hitler asked rhetorically why he should regard Jews

any differently than he regarded Soviet prisoners of war. The comparison
was a telling one. As of that point, the Germans had starved more nonJewish Soviet citizens than they had shot Jews. That fall and winter
something like two million Soviet citizens would die in the starvation
camps, and another half a million in besieged Leningrad. Now this trend
would reverse, and indeed some of the Soviet survivors of the starvation
camps would be used to kill Jews. The threat of death by starvation
turned the prisoner-of-war camps into factories of collaborators. About a
million young men of the Soviet armed forces—Russians, Ukrainians,
Belarusians, and others raised in communism and in anti-racism, most of
them men of peasant or working-class origin aged between twenty and
thirty—were chosen for new duties, directed against their homeland or
against the Jews. Rather than killing the Slavs and then deporting the
Jews, which had been the general idea, the Germans were finding ever
new ways to exploit the Slavs against the Jews. They adapted the
traditional African method of colonialism, exploiting a despised group
against a still more despised one; they would even call these new
collaborators Askaren. The Askaren had been local soldiers in German
East Africa, first deployed in the 1888–1889 Abushiri rebellion, who had
fought loyally in Africa under German command during the First World
War. German East Africa was the only colony that had been defended
until the end of the First World War, and so the legend of the Askaren
was that of fidelity in a doomed but righteous struggle.
No one had to say that the war as originally conceived had been lost.
No one had to explain that colonization of a particular territory inhabited
by subhumans, as the Nazis saw matters, was yielding pride of place to
the liberation of the planet from the domination of nonhuman Jews.
When in October 1941 Himmler spoke with one of his enterprising
lieutenants, Odilo Globocnik, the SS and Police Leader for the Lublin
district of the General Government, there would have been no need for
such explicit talk. The Lublin district lay at the eastern edge of the
General Government, on what had been the border with Soviet Ukraine
until June 1941; and it had been Globocnik’s job in the six months after
the invasion to prepare for the eastern empire. His Lublin district, thick
with prisons and camps, perhaps the ghastliest part of the General
Government, was originally meant as a kind of testing ground for the
Lebensraum to the east. As the Soviets held the line and Hitler’s priorities

shifted, Himmler and Globocnik found the way to realize their Führer’s
desires by murdering the Jews of Poland.
In the occupied Soviet Union in the second half of 1941, Globocnik’s SS
colleagues, men such as Stahlecker and Jeckeln, had improvised
techniques of mass killing from the chaos created by the first weeks of a
war of elimination against a state defined as Jewish. In the Lublin District
of the General Government in late 1941 and early 1942, Globocnik was
starting from very different initial conditions. Globocnik’s innovation was
to assemble the political fragments left by German policies of state
destruction over the previous several years. From the east, he took the
starved and demoralized Soviet prisoners of war. There are no known
cases of anyone refusing to leave the starvation camps when offered a
chance to do so, nor are any likely to be found. Trained at a camp known
as Trawniki, Soviet citizens released from the starvation facilities (among
them Belarusians, Chuvash, Estonians, Komi, Latvians, Lithuanians,
Romanians, Russians, Tatars, Ukrainians, and at least one half Jew)
would help build and guard the death factories at Bełżec, Sobibór, and
Treblinka. Later they would be deployed to empty some of the larger
ghettos, such as Warsaw. From the realities of occupied Poland,
Globocnik would exploit the ghettos, their Jewish councils, the Jewish
police, and Jewish and Polish informers.
From the west, from Germany itself, Globocnik would borrow the
technique of mass murder through carbon monoxide. In Germany and in
the annexed territories of Poland, German doctors had murdered with
canisters of carbon monoxide; in occupied Soviet Belarus and Soviet
Ukraine exhaust was pumped from vans into their own holds. Christian
Wirth of Hitler’s personal chancery, the man who had run the
“euthanasia” program in Germany, found the technical solution that
would be applied in these new facilities. He brought five young colleagues
from the “euthanasia” program, most of them specialists in burning
corpses, to Bełżec, where they experimented with methods of generating
carbon monoxide in a closed space. They finally settled on a variation of
the eastern technique: exhaust from internal combustion engines,
pumped into sealed chambers. Some hundred more participants of the
gassing program in Germany arrived in Globocnik’s Lublin District in late
1941.
The program of mass killing developed by Himmler, Globocnik, and

Wirth involved bringing these fragments together into a new whole, and
that whole into murderous motion. Beginning in early 1942 in the Lublin
District of the General Government, Globocnik’s SS men would go from
ghetto to ghetto, explaining the mission to the German stationary police.
Under German supervision, the Jewish councils would order and the
Jewish police would organize selections from the ghetto population to be
taken to the trains. When the trains arrived at the new death facilities, the
Jews would be murdered in gas chambers built and manned by Soviet
citizens.
The practice of extermination was contingent in several ways upon the
economics of scarcity. At the highest level, the failure of the German
colonial campaign meant that the German leadership had to choose
among victims. No tremendous bounty was produced by the starvation of
Slavs, but Jews could be blamed for this failure. In the politics of relative
deprivation, Poles who inherited Jewish property were all the more
attached to what they had gained, and Soviet citizens were desperate to
find a way to leave the starvation camps. In Nazi decisions about the fate
of Polish Jews, one relevant calculation became Jewish productivity
versus Jewish consumption of calories. At moments when food seemed
more pressing, Jews were killed; at moments when labor seemed more
urgent, Jews were spared. In such a dark market, in which Jews were
nothing but economic units, the general tendency was toward
extermination. In July 1942, when it became known that the General
Government was to become a net food exporter, Himmler decided that all
of its Jews should be killed by the end of the year.
—
Many Jews yielded to dreams of food when the Germans deliberately
associated nourishment with deportations. In Cracow, where GovernorGeneral Frank lived in his castle, the claim in 1942 was that Jews were
being deported to the East to bring in the harvest in Ukraine. In Warsaw,
in the largest ghetto in Frank’s General Government, Jews were promised
bread and jam if they reported to the Umschlagplatz for deportation.
With time, as Jews came to understand what deportation meant, the
politics of relative deprivation became the politics of the delay of death.
Precisely because the Germans themselves were always uncertain as to

whether they were more desperate for food or for labor, Jews could
always persuade themselves that some of their number would be spared.
The very fact of selection, as Warsaw Jews reported, meant “a division
between the productive and the nonproductive” that “broke down the
morale of the people of the ghetto.” The hope of the individual for
survival worked against the solidarity of the community. The Jewish
policemen were assigned quotas of Jews to deliver to the trains, the
fulfillment of which became their source of hope for themselves and their
families and their alienation from others. As one of their number in
Warsaw responded to the pleas of a fellow Jew: “That’s your problem. My
problem is to bring ten people.”
Most likely there was never a definitive decision to murder all the Jews
of Poland in death facilities. Once the process began in March 1942,
however, the alternatives became infeasible, and for this reason
unmentionable. As late as that February, Himmler and Heydrich were
still discussing sending Jews to the Gulag. But absent a victory over the
USSR in 1942, which was not forthcoming, this was impossible. Thus the
deportations that began in the Lublin District spread throughout the
General Government. At first Jews were sent from ghettos to Bełżec, then
to Bełżec and Sobibór, and finally to Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka. Over
the course of 1942, some 1.3 million Polish Jews were murdered in these
three death facilities. In Warsaw alone, in what was called the Grosse
Aktion, some 265,040 Jews were deported to Treblinka and murdered
and another 10,380 shot in the ghetto between July 23, 1942, and
September 21, 1942. Tens of thousands remained, mostly young men, as
the ghetto became a labor camp.
In Warsaw in late December 1942, some of those survivors, working
together in a loose confederation known as the Jewish Combat
Organization, began to assassinate the Jewish authorities of the ghetto. In
January 1943, Himmler ordered that the ghetto be dissolved entirely.
Jewish resistance prevented this deportation from being carried out. In
February, Himmler renewed his order. When the Germans came again to
the ghetto in larger numbers in April 1943, a significant number of Jews
resisted. Some were from the Jewish Combat Organization, which
included representatives of major Jewish parties such as the Bund as well
as left-wing Zionists and communists; others fought within a Jewish
Military Union that was dominated by the Revisionist Zionists of Betar. It

was the Revisionists who, following old habit, raised both the Polish and
the Zionist flags. The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising was the first major urban
resistance to German rule in Europe. The Jews understood that they were
not risking very much: In most cases, their families were already dead,
and they believed, correctly, that the same fate awaited them. The
rebellion led to the physical destruction of the Warsaw ghetto, as the
Germans used flamethrowers to extract Jews from bunkers and then
burned the entire district to the ground. The survivors were sent to other
labor camps, as originally planned, where almost all of them were shot in
1944. This was the end of the most significant Jewish community in the
world.
The man who suppressed the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising, Jürgen Stroop,
believed that he was doing his part to win a war that would make Ukraine
a German land of milk and honey. In fact, his superiors saw the
extermination of Warsaw Jews as a necessity in July 1942 because of
pressing food shortages. The logic was similar in the ghettos of the
Warthegau, such as Łódż. German Jews were dispatched to the
overcrowded ghetto there, then local German authorities were left to
solve the problem of overpopulation by their own means.
In July 1941, the local head of the SD had proposed direct killing rather
than slow starvation for the Jews of Łódż: “There is the danger this winter
that the Jews can no longer all be fed. It is to be seriously considered
whether the most humane solution might not be to finish off those Jews
not capable of working by some sort of fast-working preparation. This
would be in any event more pleasant than letting them starve.” In a
mental world where starvation was taken to be the norm, other forms of
killing could be presented as a kindness.
That winter, Jews were indeed murdered by such a “preparation”: the
exhaust fumes that had already been tested in Belarus and in the east.
The killing machines at Chełmno, where Jews from Łódż and elsewhere
in the Warthegau were taken beginning in December 1941, were parked
gas vans guarded by German Order Policemen. This was a modification of
a technique earlier used to kill people designated as “unworthy of life.”
Immediately after the German invasion of Poland, the Germans had
emptied Polish mental hospitals by gassing their patients. The SS
commando responsible for these killings, led by Herbert Lange, was
entrusted with the killing at Chełmno. There was also a certain amount of

influence from the east. Otto Bradfisch had been the commander of
Einsatzkommando 8 in Belarus, which painted Stars of David on its
vehicles to proclaim its annihilatory task. In April 1942, he was assigned
to Łódż, where he oversaw the continuing deportation of Jews to
Chełmno.
As of the end of 1942, however, a large number of Jews were still alive
in the Polish territories annexed to Germany, chiefly in Łódż. After the
first selections, the ghetto there was transformed into a work camp,
producing armaments. Tens of thousands of Jews would survive in Łódż
until almost the end of the war, when they were deported to Auschwitz.
—
In the General Government, all of the major Jewish communities had
been destroyed by autumn 1942. The Jews who were alive, with very few
exceptions such as laborers in arms factories, were killed on sight by
German police. Poles in the General Government who were caught aiding
Jews were also subject to the death penalty, and villages where Jews were
found were subject to collective retribution. In the last weeks of 1942, the
main task of the German police in the General Government was what
they called the “Jew hunts.” There was so much shooting in the
countryside that dogs on Polish farms ceased to react to the sound of
gunfire.
In 1943 and 1944 in the General Government, German police sought to
bring about the cooperation of Poles in the hunts. Himmler was at the top
of the chain of command. His orders were passed through the Higher SS
and Police Leader for Warsaw to the German Order Police. In turn, the
German Order Police was to “involve in this action the broadest possible
masses of Polish society.” Thus, the German Order Police engaged two
institutions that had existed in independent Poland, but which had been
transformed by its destruction. The first was the Polish Order Police,
which since 1939 had been purged, racialized, and subordinated to
German purposes. The second were Polish local authorities, deprived of
their previous relationship to state and law, but with two years of
responsibility for German racial policy. Polish policemen and Polish local
authorities were made personally responsible to their German superiors
for ensuring that no Jews were left alive in their districts.

There was a politics to all this, but it was not a national politics. It is
not clear in any event how many Polish-speaking peasants identified with
the Polish nation and state in 1939. The social distance between peasants
and Jews (although they lived in the same places) and between peasants
and Polish officials (although they spoke the same language) was perhaps
greater than nostalgic sentiment or wishful nationalism might suggest.
What can be said with some confidence is that after three years of
German rule, Polish-speaking peasants saw the Polish order as
vanquished and lived within the German one. They were constantly told,
and those who were literate could read, that their local authorities were
responsible for keeping their village or county free of Jews. The village
head had to post a notice promising death to Poles who aided Jews and
rewards for those who turned them in. Jewish survivors remembered
seeing such posters in every Polish village. If a Jew was hiding in a
village, the village head could be denounced to the Germans by his own
people, perhaps by a rival or someone bearing a grudge. In the Polish
countryside people denounced one another quite regularly for all sorts of
reasons; the presence of Jews was often just the pretext to settle a score.
The legacy of prewar antisemitism, spread by both the secular Right and
the Roman Catholic Church, was that Poles who wished to aid Jews
feared other Poles. A village head could not organize or sanction a rescue
of Jews unless he was sure that he could expect the solidarity of all
villagers. This led to absurd situations in which village heads bribed their
own villagers not to denounce them to the Germans.
Poles were not always executed for sheltering Jews, but they were often
enough that the fear was real. In thousands of cases across the General
Government, the German police carried out mass murders of Poles for
one violation or another. In Krosno prison, a Polish woman was executed
right after the Jew she had been sheltering was shot, her corpse pushed
on top of his. All this took place in front of the other Polish prisoners,
who could draw their own conclusions. When there was a denunciation,
German policemen arrived to find and kill the Jews, and to punish the
village if none were produced. In cases of uncertainty the villagers were
required to join the Germans in the hunt for the reported Jews. During
the “Jew hunt,” the village leaders were made hostages and, in principle,
could pay with their lives if the Jews were not found. The village night
guard, men who in times of peace watched for fire or disorder, took part

in the Jew hunts and were also made hostages. If they captured Jews,
they would be rewarded. If they failed to find Jews, their lives were
forfeit.
Sometimes Poles in the countryside would denounce Jews to the Polish
police rather than directly to the Germans. This could seem less terrible
than speaking directly to the foreign murderers. But once a Polish
policeman had such knowledge, he became personally responsible for
finding and delivering (or killing) the Jews in question. As of February
1943, the Polish police were under orders to kill “all Jews encountered,
without warning.” Sometimes the Polish police would indeed shoot the
Jews themselves, for reasons as banal as the inconvenience of riding by
horse cart to the nearest German gendarme station. Sometimes they took
the Jews to the Germans. Sometimes they were then ordered by their
German superiors to shoot the Jews. For Polish policemen, the penalty
for refusing to obey such an order was death. (For German policemen
there was no such punishment.) Even so, in some cases Polish policemen
set Jews free or even helped them to survive.
In these conditions, with violence privatized and the peasant
population mobilized, very few Jews survived in the Polish countryside.
Thousands of Jews who were on the run and in hiding were caught and
murdered, almost all after a denunciation.
—
Wherever the state had been destroyed, whether by the Germans, by the
Soviets, or both, almost all of the Jews were murdered. The Holocaust
began as mass shooting campaigns in lands where the state was
destroyed twice in quick succession, first the prewar nation-state by the
Soviets, then the Soviet apparatus by the Germans. The techniques
developed in the zone of double statelessness—the recruitment of locals,
the use of multiple German institutions, the open-air shootings—were
also applied further east, everywhere in the Soviet Union that German
power extended. In western and central Poland, where the Germans had
been present since September 1939 but began the mass murder of Jews
more than two years later, other techniques were applied: secret gassing
facilities, deportation from the ghettos, Jew hunts. For the Jews of the
Baltic states, eastern Poland, and the Soviet Union, there were bullets and

pits; for the Jews of central and western Poland, there were exhaust
fumes and ovens.
Most of the remaining Jews of Europe were destined for a place called
Auschwitz.

8
The Auschwitz Paradox

Auschwitz symbolizes the intention to murder all Jews under German
control, and Jews from every corner of the German empire were
murdered in its gas chambers. Some Jews survived Auschwitz because it
remained, to the end, a set of camps as well as a death facility, where
Jews were selected for labor as they entered. Thus a story of survival at
Auschwitz can enter collective memory. Almost literally no Jew who
stood at the edge of a death pit survived, and almost literally no Jew who
entered Treblinka or Bełżec or Sobibór or Chełmno survived. The word
“Auschwitz” has become a metonym for the Holocaust as a whole. Yet the
vast majority of Jews had already been murdered, further east, by the
time that Auschwitz became a major killing facility. Yet while Auschwitz
has been remembered, most of the Holocaust has been largely forgotten.
Auschwitz has been a relatively manageable symbol for Germany after
the Second World War, significantly reducing the actual scale of the evil
done. The conflation of Auschwitz with the Holocaust made plausible the
grotesque claim that Germans did not know about the mass murder of
the European Jews while it was taking place. It is possible that some
Germans did not know exactly what happened at Auschwitz. It is not
possible that many Germans did not know about the mass murder of
Jews. The mass murder of Jews was known and discussed in Germany, at
least among families and friends, long before Auschwitz became a death
facility. In the East, where tens of thousands of Germans shot millions of
Jews over hundreds of death pits over the course of three years, most
people knew what was happening. Hundreds of thousands of Germans
witnessed the killings, and millions of Germans on the eastern front knew
about them. During the war, wives and even children visited the killing

sites; and soldiers, policemen, and others wrote home to their families,
sometimes with photographs, about the details. German homes were
enriched, millions of times over, by plunder from the murdered Jews,
sent by post or brought back by soldiers and policemen on leave.
For similar reasons, Auschwitz was a convenient symbol in the postwar
Soviet Union and today in post-communist Russia. If the Holocaust is
reduced to Auschwitz, then it can easily be forgotten that the German
mass killing of Jews began in places that the Soviet Union had just
conquered. Everyone in the western Soviet Union knew about the mass
murder of the Jews, for the same reason that the Germans did: In the
East the method of mass murder required tens of thousands of
participants and was witnessed by hundreds of thousands of people. The
Germans left, but their death pits remained. If the Holocaust is identified
only with Auschwitz, this experience, too, can be excluded from history
and commemoration.
Auschwitz was one of the few parts of the Holocaust to which Soviet
citizens did not contribute. Soviet citizens were recruited by the Germans
for the mass shootings of Jews, and Soviet citizens built and guarded the
gassing facilities at Treblinka, Bełżec, and Sobibór. To be sure, all of this
was possible because the Germans sought to destroy the Soviet state, and
because the Soviet citizens in question were unmoored from prewar
reality and in some cases trying to preserve their own lives. Yet after the
war, Soviet propaganda was helpless to explain how so many people
produced by the Soviet system had proven to be useful collaborators in
the mass murder of so many other people produced by the Soviet system.
It was enough of a problem, in the post-Stalin era that began with his
death in 1953 and continues to this day, to explain why Soviet policy
brought about the death of millions of Soviet citizens by famine and
terror in the 1930s. This historical reality remains thoroughly politicized.
The perhaps deeper problem, that tens of thousands of Soviet citizens
could contribute to the murder of further millions of Soviet citizens on
behalf of a totally alien system, has never been addressed. It has instead
been displaced.
Auschwitz has also become the standard shorthand of the Holocaust
because, when treated in a certain mythical and reductive way, it seems to
separate the mass murder of Jews from human choices and actions.
Insofar as the Holocaust is limited to Auschwitz, it can be isolated from

most of the nations it touched as well as from the landscapes it altered.
The gates and walls of Auschwitz can seem to contain an evil that, in fact,
extended from Paris to Smolensk. Auschwitz, a German word defining a
bit of territory that before and after the war was in Poland, does not seem
like an actual place. It is surrounded by mental as well as physical barbed
wire. Auschwitz calls to mind mechanized killing, or ruthless
bureaucracy, or the march of modernity, or even the endpoint of
enlightenment. This makes the murder of children, women, and men
seem like an inhuman process in which forces larger than the human
were entirely responsible. When the mass murder of Jews is limited to an
exceptional place and treated as the result of impersonal procedures, then
we need not confront the fact that people not very different from us
murdered other people not very different from us at close quarters.
—
In the history of the Holocaust, Auschwitz was a place where the third
technique of mass killing was developed, third in chronological order and
also third in significance. The most important technique, because it came
first, because it killed the most Jews, and because it demonstrated that a
Final Solution by mass killing was possible, was shooting over pits. The
next most important, and the next to be developed, was asphyxiation by
the exhaust fumes of internal combustion engines. At around the time
that these carbon monoxide facilities were coming into use, in early 1942,
the policy of murdering all Jews was extended from the occupied Soviet
Union and occupied Poland to all lands that fell under German control.
Auschwitz became the major killing site for Jews in 1943 and 1944.
Auschwitz arose as a concentration camp, the seventh large one in the
Reich, after Dachau, Sachsenhausen, Buchenwald, Flossenbürg,
Mauthausen, and Ravensbrück. Its notorious greeting, “Arbeit macht
frei,” arose from these German precedents. This new camp, unlike these
antecedents, was located in the lands of occupied Poland annexed by the
Reich and thus within the zone where the Nazi imagination flourished. Its
original purpose in 1940 was to prepare the way for the larger eastern
empire to come. Its first prisoners were Poles who were punished for
their real or anticipated resistance. Its next major victim group was
Soviet prisoners of war taken after the invasion of 1941. Insofar as Jews

were admitted to Auschwitz in these early years, it was with the intention
of marching them east in columns as slave laborers who would exhaust
themselves building the German empire on conquered Soviet lands. Jews
who lived near Auschwitz were actually among the last Polish Jews to be
killed. They were first deported to Auschwitz as forced laborers, because
that was Auschwitz’s original mission. After the vast majority of Jews in
the rest of Poland were already dead, murdered in pits or at Treblinka,
Sobibór, Bełżec, or Chełmno, most Jews of the Auschwitz region were still
alive.
The purpose of Auschwitz changed as the Nazi colonial mission gave
way to the Final Solution, as the subjugation of Slavs was deprioritized
and the murder of Jews became urgent. This general shift was evident
across a whole range of Nazi endeavors: the shift by the Einsatzgruppen
from killing some Jews to killing all of them; the use of German
policemen originally assigned to other missions for the mass shooting of
Jews; the recruitment of local people for auxiliary police; the release of
some Soviet prisoners of war so that they could aid in the killing of Jews;
the transformation of the Lublin District from a forepost of empire to an
experimental ground for gassing facilities. In the case of Auschwitz, the
shift from the dream of conquest to the reality of annihilation meant that
a camp became a killing facility. The killing agent itself reveals the
evolution. Hydrocyanic acid, sold under the trade name Zyklon B, was
originally used to fumigate the barracks of the Polish prisoners. Then it
was used to murder Soviet prisoners of war. Finally it would be used to
murder nearly a million Jews.
Auschwitz was built in a zone of state destruction, after the invasion of
Poland and as part of the attempt to obliterate the Polish political nation.
Its original infrastructure was that of a Polish military barracks. As a
territory it was conquered by Germany in September 1939 and granted to
Germany by the terms of the German-Soviet Treaty on Borders and
Friendship. Neither its construction nor its subsequent adaptations
would have been thinkable, let alone possible, without the German
campaign to eliminate rival polities and without the special talents and
unusual goals of the state destroyers of the SS.
Auschwitz was unusual, however, in one important respect. Unlike the
death pits in the doubly occupied zone and the occupied Soviet Union,
unlike the death facilities at Bełżec, Sobibór, Treblinka, and Chełmno, it

was the planned murder site for very large numbers of Jews who were
still citizens of states that Germany recognized as sovereign. Its intended
Jewish victims were generally people who lived beyond the German zone
of state destruction and who were therefore much less vulnerable to the
imposing power of the SS. Such individuals had to be abandoned by their
governments or stripped of their citizenship and physically transported
from their country of residence to Auschwitz. There was nothing
automatic about this, and indeed it often proved to be difficult.
Hitler’s fantasy of a planet without Jews was always present, and his
desire to rid Europe of Jews was known to his subordinates no later than
the spring of 1942. As of that moment, the policy of the mass murder of
Jews, initiated the previous year in the Soviet Union, was general. Yet
whether and to what extent that policy could be realized depended upon
where Jews happened to live. Because the successful killing strategies
were a result of prior decisions and actions that were specific to a certain
part of eastern Europe, they could not be repeated with the same kind of
success elsewhere. What happened to states in 1939, 1940, and 1941, in
other words, was crucial for what would happen to Jews in 1942, 1943,
and 1944. The Germans could not exploit the psychological, material, and
political resources created by Soviet occupation in places where there had
been no Soviet occupation. The Germans could not reassemble the
fragments of destroyed states in places where they or the Soviets had not
destroyed the state. The Germans could not apply the politics of relative
deprivation in places where the war was not a campaign of racial mastery.
In the museum at Auschwitz built in communist Poland after the war, its
victims were classified by citizenship. This was designed to obfuscate the
basic fact that the great majority of them were Jews, and murdered for no
other reason. The emphasis on citizenship also obfuscated a more subtle
but central fact: that the Jews who were killed were first separated from
their states.
In many of the places from which the Jews were to be sent to
Auschwitz, none of these conditions existed, and so Jews survived.
Millions of European Jews who were condemned to die at Auschwitz
survived because they never boarded a train. Jews under German control
who were supposed to be sent to Auschwitz were more likely to survive
than Jews under German control who were not supposed to be sent to
Auschwitz. That is the Auschwitz paradox, and it can only be resolved by

considering how states were and were not destroyed. These are the
political particularities that explain the different outcomes within the
universal design. Auschwitz demonstrates the universal design to kill
Jews. It also demonstrates the general significance of statehood in
protecting them.
—
A comparison between two countries under German occupation can
suggest the significance of the political factor. Estonia and Denmark had
a great deal in common when the Second World War began. Each was a
small northern European state with a long Baltic coast, and each was
home to a very small number of Jews. During the war both were under
German occupation, both were subject to the Final Solution, and both
were declared judenfrei—free of Jews—by their German occupiers. And
yet the history of the Holocaust in each land could hardly have been more
different. In Estonia, about 99 percent of the Jews who were present
when German forces arrived were killed. In Denmark, about 99 percent
of Jews who had Danish citizenship survived. The Jews of Denmark were
marked for Auschwitz; the Jews of Estonia met their fate before
Auschwitz became a death facility.
In no country under German occupation did a higher percentage of
Jews die than in Estonia, and in none did a higher proportion survive
than in Denmark. Given the totality of the German policy of killing Jews,
this difference calls for an explanation. Surely the population of Estonia
was known for its antisemitism? If anything, such a tradition is easier to
document in Denmark. Surely the Estonians were governed by
antisemites before the war? The double dictatorship of Konstantin Päts
and Johan Laidoner was clearly conservative, but it came to power in a
coup against the Far Right in 1934. In fact, Estonian Jews were equal
citizens of the republic, which took in some Jewish refugees from Austria
and Germany. Denmark, by contrast, turned away Jewish refugees after
1935.
Intuitions fail. The extremely different outcomes seem to have little to
do with popular attitudes and prewar politics, and much to do with
different experiences of war and occupation. Auschwitz reminds us of
Hitler’s vision of a world without Jews; it should also teach us of the

importance of politics in hastening or hindering the realization of that
vision.
—
Estonia shared the fate of Lithuania and Latvia in 1940. Like the other
two Baltic states, it was granted by Germany to the Soviets by the terms
of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, as modified and confirmed by the Treaty
on Borders and Friendship of September 1939. The Soviet occupation of
Estonia brought the complete destruction of the Estonian upper
administration and political elite. President Päts, for example, was taken
from his farm and deported to the Soviet Union, where he died. Laidoner,
the commander in chief of the armed forces, also perished in exile after
deportation. Of the eleven members of the last Estonian government, ten
were imprisoned and nine of these killed (four by execution, five dying in
Soviet camps).
Soviet law was applied retroactively in occupied Estonia, under the
logic that the Estonian state not only did not exist, but had never existed.
State service in the 1920s and 1930s was thus considered a crime. In what
quickly became Soviet Estonia, the new Soviet authorities carried out
some four hundred executions, and were preparing mass deportations as
the German armed forces assembled to invade the Soviet Union in June
1941. On the night of June 14, the Soviet NKVD deported about 10,200
Estonian citizens, one percent of the entire population (and about ten
percent of the Jewish minority, which was hugely overrepresented in
Soviet repressions). A few days later, as German forces raced north
through the Baltics to Estonia, the Soviets were shooting Estonian
prisoners and leaving their corpses in the prisons.
The Germans arrived in Estonia in early July 1941 with their
handpicked Estonians. As in Lithuania and Latvia, the Soviet occupation
of Estonia had forced thousands of people to flee the country, many to
Berlin. This left the Germans their choice of future collaborators. Many
Estonians wished to return; the Germans could choose the ones they saw
as most useful to their own purposes. The double occupation, here as
elsewhere, meant a double filtering of the political elite. The Soviets
destroyed the former ruling class; the Germans now prevented anyone
who did not seem sufficiently pliable from returning. Naturally, the Nazi

selection excluded the political Left and Center. As elsewhere that
summer, the Germans could exploit moral, material, and political
resources created by the Soviet occupation.
As in Latvia and Lithuania, the political resource in Estonia was
especially abundant. An entire state had been destroyed in humiliating
and vicious fashion only a year earlier, so people were prepared for
personal and political redemption. By July 1941, when Einsatzgruppe A
reached Estonia, the Germans had perfected their argument that the
liberation that they offered was from Jews and that local participation in
such liberation was a precondition to political negotiations. As in
Lithuania and Latvia, locals in Estonia served as translators of this
message, adding the element that the Germans themselves would not
have understood: that if Estonians collaborated with the second
(German) occupier, their first (Soviet) collaboration would be forgotten.
No pogroms of Jews took place in Estonia, nor were such seen as
necessary by the Germans.
Double collaboration was quite widespread. Some of the Estonian antiSoviet partisans known as the Home Guard killed Jews; the most zealous
killers among those partisans were Estonian communists who had
switched sides as the German invasion began in order to clear their
names. The Estonian policemen who had collaborated in the Soviet
deportations of Estonians and Jews now carried out the German murder
of Estonians and Jews. Whereas the Soviets deported about ten thousand
Estonian citizens, including about 450 Jews, under German occupation
some ten thousand Estonian citizens were executed, among them 963
Jews. From the local perpetrator’s perspective the work was not entirely
different.
Former employees of the Soviet NKVD were especially significant in
the mass murder of Jews in Estonia. Ain-Ervin Mere, for example, was an
NKVD agent and director of a special department of the Estonian Rifle
Corps, a Soviet unit that was supposed to defend Soviet Estonia from
capitalist invasion. Instead he joined the Estonian Security Police under
the Germans, serving as its commander from May 1942 through March
1943. The Estonian Security Police was the major agency charged with
the murder of Jews. From April 1943 through the end of the war, Mere
was a battalion commander in a Waffen-SS division. Ervin Viks, an
Estonian policeman in the interwar period, worked for the NKVD in 1940

and 1941. Then he joined the Estonian Security Police under the
Germans, where he ordered hundreds of executions of Jews and nonJews. Alexander Viidik had served in the Estonian Political Police before
the war, then offered his services to the Soviet NKVD in 1940. After the
German invasion he worked for the SD, the intelligence section of the SS,
where he recruited his former Soviet contacts.
In Estonia, as everywhere else, the people who killed Jews under the
German occupation also killed others. In occupied Lithuania, the
policemen who took part in the shooting of more than 150,000 Jews in
1941 also guarded the camps where a similar number of Soviet prisoners
of war starved. In Latvia, the commando that murdered the country’s
Jews also killed psychiatric patients and Belarusian civilians. Because
there were very few Jews in Estonia, the murder of non-Jews was
relatively more important than elsewhere. All of the 963 Estonian Jews
murdered under German occupation were killed by Estonians, usually
policemen. About ten times as many non-Jewish Estonians were also
killed by those same Estonian policemen.
—
In Denmark almost everything was different. Unlike other northern
European states such as Finland, Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, the
Kingdom of Denmark shared no border with the Soviet Union, was not
subject to the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, and was not occupied by the Red
Army. When the Second World War began with a German-Soviet
invasion of Poland in 1939, Denmark was not involved. It suffered no
Soviet invasion; its elites were untouched by Soviet practices of mass
shooting and deportation. The political resource that was generated in
Estonia could not be created in Denmark, since the Danish state was
never destroyed. No double collaboration could be expected when there
was only one occupation.
The German occupation of Denmark, when it came in April 1940, was
mild. Denmark was, for Germany, neither an ideological enemy nor a
racial target, and its territory was invaded for straightforward military
reasons. The Germans did not declare, as they had already in Poland and
would soon in the USSR, that the state they had attacked no longer
existed. On the contrary, the German occupation proceeded on the

explicit basis of Danish sovereignty. The Germans made clear that they
did not “aim at disturbing the territorial integrity or the political
independence of the Kingdom of Denmark.” King Christian remained in
Copenhagen and ruled as head of state. Democratic elections continued,
parliament functioned, and governments changed according to the
wishes of Danes. After 1941, during the unexpectedly long and fruitless
German campaign in the East, Denmark’s main task in the German
empire was to provide food. Six thousand Danish men did serve in the
Waffen-SS, some of them in the Wiking division alongside Estonians.
When the Final Solution was extended westward from the occupied
Soviet Union to the rest of Europe in 1942, this created a problem in
German-Danish relations. Danish authorities understood that yielding
Jewish citizens to Germany would compromise Danish sovereignty. In
December 1942, the United States, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union
issued a warning that collaborators in the German crime of killing Jews
would face consequences after the war. Sovereign governments, such as
the Danish one, were in a position to heed such warnings. In early 1943,
after the German surrender at Stalingrad, the tide of the war turned
visibly against Germany. Copenhagen had ever less reason to participate
in the Final Solution, while German authorities had ever less reason to
alienate the Danes.
The elimination of the Jews nevertheless remained a constant priority
in Berlin, and for Werner Best, the leader of the Nazi occupation
authority in Denmark. In his initial communications with Berlin, Best
maintained that a Final Solution in Denmark was impractical, since it
would violate the constitution and lead to the fall of the government. This
would force a massive German intervention and disrupt the favorable
equilibrium that had been attained. But when the Danish government fell
for other reasons, Best saw the opportunity to kill the Jews. It could be
done, he thought, in the interval of instability, before a new government
was formed. He made the appropriate proposal to Berlin in early
September 1943.
There was a will but there was not a way. Rudolf Mildner was assigned
to Copenhagen as the head of the Security Police and SD on September
20. He came directly from Katowice, in occupied Poland, where he had
been the Gestapo chief with responsibility for Auschwitz. In other words,
he was hardly a man without experience in the mass murder of Jews. Yet

what he saw in Copenhagen convinced him that a Final Solution, at least
of the sort that had been achieved in the stateless zone, was impossible in
Denmark. He was confronted in Copenhagen with institutions that had
been abolished further east: a sovereign state, political parties with
convictions and support, local civil society in various forms, a police force
that could not be expected to cooperate. Other German authorities had
already drawn much the same conclusion. The local army commander
refused to support the German police in any action against Jews. The
local naval commander sent all of his ships for repairs on the day chosen
for the roundup of Jews, October 2, 1943, so that the coast would be clear
for whatever the Danes would wish to do. He also informed Social
Democratic politicians of the date, and they in turn informed Danish
Jews.
Denmark’s neighbor Sweden, neutral in the war but complicit in the
economic side of Germany’s war effort, had every reason in 1943 to
demonstrate a tilt towards the Allies. The Swedish government now
proposed to Germany that Sweden take Denmark’s Jews. It repeated the
proposal over the radio on an open frequency, so that Danish Jews knew
that they would be welcome in Sweden. Danes then arranged for a flotilla
to ship their Jewish population to Sweden. The German police knew
about this undertaking and did not stop it; the German navy watched the
Danish boats float slowly by. The Danish citizens did this work at little
risk to themselves, since helping their fellow citizens was not a crime in
their own country. The German police raid of October 2 caught only 481
of the 6,000 or so Jews of Danish citizenship. The sovereign Danish
government intervened with Berlin on behalf of these citizens. Some of
them were released, and the rest were sent to Theresienstadt, a transit
camp in what had been Terezín in Czechoslovakia, rather than to
Auschwitz. Not a single one of them was gassed. Other Jews from other
countries were however sent from Theresienstadt to Auschwitz and
murdered to make room for the Danish Jews. German authorities took
advantage of the presence of Danish Jews to make a propaganda film
about the ostensibly good conditions for Jewish life in their camps.
Jews who were Danish citizens survived, which is not exactly the same
thing as Jews in Denmark surviving. Danish authorities did not accept
Jewish refugees after 1935, and they deported some of the ones who had
arrived earlier back to Germany. The Jews who were denied state

protection in Denmark shared the fate of Jews who lacked state
protection in Estonia or, for that matter, everywhere else: death.
—
Occupied Estonia was part of the zone of statelessness where the entire
Holocaust took place. In Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, and the
western Soviet Union, Hitler’s vision of global racial struggle was
converted, in conditions of statelessness, to new forms of politics. In each
of these places the sequence of events that permitted the emergence of
the Final Solution as mass killing was different. Nevertheless, a set of
actions and absences can be identified.
The actions were the advance creation of racial or hybrid institutions
whose major task was state destruction; the undertaking of aggressive
war, permitting these institutions to fulfill their mission beyond their own
homeland and in a permissive environment; the fact of state destruction,
the removal of political capacity, the murder of leading classes, and the
redefinition of such actions as law; the solicitation of collaboration, which
was effective when it involved the exploitation of political resources
created by an earlier state destroyer, but which always required the
exploitation of existing local police forces, cut off from previous authority
or eager to prove their loyalty after previous collaboration; the
mobilization of psychological resources such as the release from
humiliation and the gratification of the desire for revenge; the
exploitation of greed, the material resource, enabled by ongoing or prior
elimination of property rights; the recruitment of German institutions
beyond those originally tasked with killing civilians; the exploitation of
fragments of institutions remaining from earlier destructions of states.
After German (or Soviet and German) power destroyed states, the
absences were the formal denial of sovereignty and the nullification of
any connection by foreign policy to a larger world beyond German power;
the lack of an overarching political entity that might protect its citizens,
or motivate its citizens to protect it, and thus the disappearance of
citizenship as a reciprocal relationship; the experience of the removal of
traditional state protections in the form of laws and customs; the
resulting spread of the dark market, the economic behaviors that arise in
a free market without individual rights in which some people are treated

as mere economic units to be consumed or sold; and the legal abyss,
where all was permitted, where colonial thinking was natural, because
international law in the traditional European sense did not apply.
These lists of actions and absences are both ways of characterizing the
same extreme: the stateless zone where a Holocaust could be imagined,
begun, and completed. At the other extreme during the Second World
War were sovereign states that were untouched by German power.
Although these generally pass unmentioned in analyses of the Holocaust,
they are worth considering. After all, Hitler’s racial theory was planetary,
and his declaration of war against the Jews was global. There is no
particular reason to think that antisemitism was more prevalent in
Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania between the wars than it was in the United
States, Great Britain, or Canada.
Most Jews in the world were safe during the Holocaust for the simple
reason that German power did not extend to the places they lived and did
not threaten the states of which they were citizens. Jews with Polish
passports were safe in countries that recognized the prewar Polish state,
and killed in countries that did not. American and British Jews were safe,
not just in their home countries but everywhere. The Germans did not
contemplate murdering Jews who held American and British passports,
and, with few exceptions, did not do so. Statehood, like statelessness,
followed Jews wherever they went. Soviet Jews were killed, with few
exceptions, if they were caught in the lands occupied by the Germans and
where Germany fought its war of extermination. In these places the
Germans behaved as if the Soviet state had been destroyed and sought to
annihilate all of its traces. So long as Jews were in Soviet territory and
east of the German occupation, however, they were preserved from the
Final Solution—although they were of course subject to Soviet policies.
Roughly fifteen percent of the Polish Jews deported by the NKVD in 1940
died in transit or in the Gulag; even so, at the end of the war these
deportees were the largest surviving group of Polish Jews.
At one extreme of state destruction, the Holocaust took place; at the
other extreme of state integrity, it did not. The middle cases, where the
Nazi leadership sought but could not complete a Final Solution, are
places where German power reached but where the state was not
destroyed: the countries that were allied with Germany or occupied by
Germany (or both). German policy was that Jews who inhabited such

places were to be extracted, deported, and killed. Although a horribly
high number of Jews from such countries were killed, and the fate of
Jews in such places was always worse than that of their fellow citizens,
more than half of the Jews who had been citizens of these countries,
taken together as a group, survived. The scale of suffering, almost one
murder for every two Jews, exceeds that of any other category of people
in the Second World War. Yet it is sufficiently different from the murder
rate in the stateless zone, something like nineteen murders for every
twenty Jews, to warrant serious attention. The history of each country
that retained (some measure of) sovereignty despite German influence
was, of course, distinct, but the logics of survival were everywhere the
same: citizenship, bureaucracy, and foreign policy.
—
Citizenship is the name of a reciprocal relationship between an individual
and a sheltering polity. When there was no state, no one was a citizen,
and human life could be treated carelessly. Nowhere in occupied Europe
were non-Jews treated as badly as Jews. But in places where the state was
destroyed, no one was a citizen and no one enjoyed any predictable form
of state protection. This meant that the other major German mass crimes,
the starvation of prisoners of war and the murder of civilians—mostly
Belarusians and Poles and Gypsies—also took place almost entirely
within zones of statelessness. These policies together killed about as
many people as the Holocaust, and they were implemented, and could
only be implemented, in the same places. Where the state was not
destroyed such extremes were impossible.
In states allied with Germany or states under more traditional
occupation regimes, where the major political institutions remained
intact, non-Jews who protected Jews were rarely punished for doing so.
Non-Jews who were citizens of states could not simply be killed if they
aided Jews. In the General Government and in the occupied western
Soviet Union, however, the punishment for aiding Jews was death. More
Poles were executed for aiding Jews in individual districts of the General
Government than in entire west European countries. This is not because
Poles were particularly inclined to rescue Jews, which they were not. It is
because they were, in fact, sometimes executed for doing so, which rarely

happened in western Europe. Indeed, in some places in German-occupied
western Europe it was not even a punishable criminal offense to hide a
Jew.
Compare the fates of Victor Klemperer, Anne Frank, and Emanuel
Ringelblum, three famous chroniclers of these years. Klemperer was a
German scholar of Jewish origin who wrote a brilliant analysis of the
language of the Third Reich. Frank was a German Jewish girl in hiding in
the Netherlands who kept a diary that later became the most widely read
text about the Holocaust. Ringelblum was a historian of Jewish life in
Poland who, within the Warsaw ghetto, organized the assembly of an
entire archive, creating one of the most important collections of sources
of the Holocaust. “Collect as much as possible,” said Ringelblum to a
colleague in the project known as Oneg Shabbat. “They can sort it out
after the war.” Klemperer lived and so did the person who cared for him;
Frank died but the people who tried to shelter her survived; Ringelblum
was shot along with several people who had helped him. These fates
reflect the different legal structures of Germany, the occupied
Netherlands, and occupied Poland during the war.
Because Klemperer was a German citizen with a non-Jewish wife, he
was not subject to the general policy of the deportation and murder of
German Jews. Since his wife did not divorce him, he, like many such
German Jewish men, survived. Anne Frank was also a German Jew, but
in fleeing to the Netherlands she lost even the residual state membership
available to her under the Nuremberg Laws. She and her family were
eventually discovered and deported to Auschwitz. She died after a
transfer to Bergen-Belsen, probably of typhus. The Dutch citizens who
had hidden her family survived, since what they did was not subject to
criminal prosecution in the Netherlands. Ringelblum’s history was
different. He was captured and rescued multiple times, aided by both
Polish Jews and non-Jewish Poles. In the end, he and the Poles with
whom he was hiding were all executed, probably together, in the ashes of
the Warsaw ghetto. Most Poles who tried to aid Jews were not killed, but
many of them were; and it was a risk that they all faced. This was the
stateless predicament.
For Jews themselves, the existence of a state meant citizenship, even if
only in an attenuated and humiliating form. Citizenship meant the legal
possibility of emigration. Most German and Austrian Jews exploited this

possibility, although they generally lost their possessions and their
connections to their previous lives in doing so. Citizenship for Jews
meant the existence of a civil code, even if sometimes a very
discriminatory one, which allowed them claims to property. These could
be traded, in ways that were obviously unjust, for the right to depart. The
legal exploitation of Jews is often seen as a step towards their
extermination, but this was not exactly the case. Even the most
exploitative and painful forms of legal discrimination were much less
risky to Jewish life than regime change or removal of state authority. In
those situations, Jews were suddenly and totally vulnerable, since they
lost their access to the civil code and thus their property rights. Rather
than trading their property for their lives, they lost both.
Legal discrimination by antisemitic states did not bring an automatic
downward spiral toward death, but state destruction did. Once a Jew lost
access to a state he or she lost access to the protection of higher
authorities and lower bureaucrats. Jews could live if they restored that
access, but this was a difficult feat. Anton Schmid was a German
(Austrian) soldier from Vienna who, in Vilnius, was responsible for the
office that returned individual German soldiers to their units. He saved a
Jewish man by providing him with a Wehrmacht uniform and paybook.
He saved a Jewish woman in Vilnius by inventing for her a legal identity.
With a bit of charm and bluster he generated a false baptismal certificate
and moved her through the five necessary offices until she was fully
documented. No Jew alone in the stateless zone could have done that. All
in all, Schmid provided at least one hundred Jews with documents that
gave them a chance to live.
Citizenship in modern states means access to bureaucracy.
Bureaucracy has the reputation of killing Jews; it would be closer to the
truth to say that it was the removal of bureaucracy that killed Jews. So
long as state sovereignty persisted, so did the limits and possibilities
afforded by bureaucracy. In most offices, time is slowed and matters are
considered, perhaps with the help of petitions or bribes. When people in
sovereign states beyond Germany wished to be noble, bureaucracy
provided them with the opportunity to frame their arguments on behalf
of individual Jews in the pragmatic or patriotic terms that employees of
the state could understand and endorse. The bureaucracies beyond
Germany also exhibited the typical tendencies of passing the buck,

awaiting clear orders from higher authorities, and insisting on clarity of
expression and proper paperwork. Many of the things that make
bureaucracies annoying in daily life could and did mean survival for
Jews.
Even German bureaucracy did not kill Jews by itself. Even after it was
overlaid and penetrated by Nazi structures for six years, German
bureaucracy was not capable of murdering the Jews of Germany. German
officials were never even instructed, in any final and dispositive way, as to
who among German citizens counted as a Jew. At the infamous Wannsee
Conference in January 1942, the issue seems to have consumed more
time than any other; but it was not resolved, either then or later. This was
not for lack of desire: The lawyers concerned believed that Jewish “blood”
had to be cleansed “from the German and indeed the entire European
bloodstream.” Such a thing could be undertaken only when neighboring
European countries were invaded and their polities wrecked. German
Jews died not because of bureaucratic precision in Germany but because
of the destruction of bureaucracies in other countries. German Jews were
not killed, with a very few exceptions, on the territory of prewar
Germany. Instead they were extracted from Germany and deported to
bureaucracy-free zones in the East, places where they would have been
entirely safe before the war.
The killing sites of German Jews were places such as Łodż, Riga, and
Minsk. If the Holocaust is recalled from the perspective of German Jews,
as it usually is, these names evoke nothing but the horror of death amidst
the unknown. In the minds of many Germans, and thus in many German
sources, these cities are nothing more than improbable assemblages of
subhumans in the colonial Lebensraum. The combination of Nazi and
German Jewish sources can convey a misleadingly incomplete impression
of these places.
Before the war, before the arrival of policies of state destruction, each
of these cities was a model of Jewish civil society in Europe. Łodż, for
example, was Poland’s second largest city and its second largest Jewish
city, with a sizable Jewish middle class. It was the birthplace of one of the
most influential poets of the Polish language, Julian Tuwim, who was a
Jew. It was annexed to the Reich after the 1939 invasion of Poland. Riga
had been the capital of Latvia, where Jews enjoyed equal rights under the
civil code, had sat in parliament, and were ministers of government. In

the late 1930s, Riga was a site of refuge for a considerable number of
Jews from Germany and Austria. It was altered first by Soviet state
destruction in 1940 and then by German state destruction in 1941. Minsk,
before the German invasion of the Soviet Union, had been the capital of
the Belarusian Soviet Socialist Republic. Rates of intermarriage were
high, and Jewish and non-Jewish schoolchildren were often close friends.
Jews had been executed in large numbers in the Soviet Great Terror of
1937, but not as Jews; most often they were taken away by the NKVD’s
black ravens and shot on false charges of espionage for Poland.
Antisemitism was certainly present in Soviet Minsk; but it was a crime.
Minsk had to be occupied by Germany, as it was in 1941, before it could
become a place where people were murdered as Jews. Jewish urban
civilization in eastern Europe had exhibited great variety; only the
destruction of the state transformed cities with Jewish particularities into
sites for a general policy of killing.
Bureaucracies in Germany could kill Jews only when bureaucracy-free
zones elsewhere had been established. The elimination of Polish
statehood at the beginning of the war was thus crucial for the entire
course of the Holocaust, since it was on occupied Polish territory, in
Germany’s special colonial zone, that death facilities could be established.
The Germans also considered creating a death facility in the occupied
Soviet Union, in Mahileu. This was never undertaken; the crematoria
designed for Mahileu were delivered instead to Auschwitz.
—
As a general matter, bureaucrats owed their salaries and their dignity to
the sovereign state, and they understood that compromises over citizens
meant compromises about citizenship, and that compromises over
citizenship meant the weakening of sovereignty. Even when bureaucrats
were implementing anti-Jewish measures, it mattered to them that these
were policies that originated locally, rather than ones imposed from
abroad. The thought “our Jews, our solution” was not noble, but it was
typical. Then as now, sovereignty meant the visible ability to conduct
foreign policy. In most places and times, the fundamental goal of foreign
policy was to preserve the state. This required the ability to alter Jewish
policy, since one Jewish policy or another might seem more strategically

promising given the constellation of international power at a given
moment. Even ethnic cleansers who were convinced that deporting Jews
served the state did not lose sight of the fact that the Jewish question was
only one issue among others.
For everyone making foreign policy who maintained the typical
political focus on the state itself, the crucial question was always the likely
outcome of the war. In general, states allied to Nazi Germany tacked
towards Nazi policy through 1942 (although none of them followed it
completely), and then toward Allied policy thereafter (while, of course,
beginning from a position of antisemitic policy and sometimes a record of
mass killing). Insofar as states were sovereign, policy was changed, and
Jews sometimes survived as a result. Where sovereignty had been
eliminated, foreign policy was no longer made.
—
Thus citizenship, bureaucracy, and foreign policy hindered the Nazi drive
to have all European Jews murdered. Of course, each of the many states
affected but not destroyed by German policy had its own history and its
own particularities. Among the states that were not destroyed but were in
some way dominated by Germany, three groups emerge: first, puppet
states such as Slovakia and Croatia created in the wake of the destruction
of other states; second, states that existed before the war and allied with
Nazi Germany of their own accord, such as Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria,
and Italy; and third, states whose territories were occupied by Nazi
Germany after defeat on the battlefield and whose institutions were
altered to various degrees without being completely destroyed, such as
France, the Netherlands, and Greece. The variation among these
countries was not as extreme as that between Estonia and Denmark. They
supply points on the spectrum between the two points of double
annihilation of sovereignty and mild German occupation. The history of
their Jews confirms the connection between sovereignty and survival.

9
Sovereignty and Survival

Among Germany’s allies, the puppets that arose from the wreckage of
other states most closely resembled the zone of lawlessness where the
Holocaust took place. A state had to be eliminated in order for such
entities to be born, and both the end of the old and the creation of the
new took place at Germany’s behest. All of the citizens of that prior state
lost the protection of the previous regime during the transition. The
rulers of new states could then decide which of the people on their
territory would be granted citizenship. When constitutions were written
under German tutelage, it was unlikely that Jews would be granted full
membership in the state. Germany was eager to receive the Jewish
populations of these new states, first in labor camps and then in death
facilities, which created an opportunity for local ethnic cleansers. Both of
the puppet states that Germany created, Croatia from Yugoslavia and
Slovakia from Czechoslovakia, were ruled by nationalists who could not
have reached power without the destruction of multinational units. Over
the long term, the puppets’ factual dependence upon Nazi Germany
meant that they did not engage in normal foreign policy and were not
really sovereign. Since such entities had no prospects of surviving a Nazi
defeat, their leaders could not really contemplate switching sides or
trying to save their remaining Jews.
Germany invaded Yugoslavia in April 1941 after a coup took the
country out of the Axis. The invasion was an Axis operation, with Italian,
Hungarian, and Bulgarian troops taking part. Yugoslavia had been a
centralized state dominated by Serbs; after its destruction Serbia became
a district under German military occupation. Although a puppet
government was appointed, it lacked every aspect of sovereignty. In

Serbia, Germans placed all male Jews capable of work into forced labor
camps and announced that all sabotage would bring massive retaliation.
As in the occupied Soviet Union, and on a similar timetable, German
occupation forces opted for terror against civilians as the central method
of control. Reprisals for any act of resistance were taken against Jews
(and sometimes against Gypsies or communists), with a standard ratio of
one hundred locals killed for every German death. By this method the
vast majority of Serbia’s Jews, about eight thousand, were dead by the
end of 1941.

After Serbs, Croatians had been the next most numerous population of

Yugoslavia. The prewar Kingdom of Yugoslavia had not been a federation
divided into national territories; its electoral districts were
gerrymandered to ensure the dominance of Serbs. For these and other
reasons, Croatians had substantial grievances about rule from Belgrade,
which were articulated by the Croatian Peasant Party. It differed from the
radical Croatian nationalists of the Ustaše in that it opposed terrorism. It
is impossible that the Ustaše could have come into power in Yugoslavia
and extremely unlikely that it would have won elections in a democratic
and independent Croatia. The Ustaše was, however, the chosen tool of the
Germans. Its regime blamed Serbs and Jews for the existence and
injustices of Yugoslavia and undertook a program of ethnic cleansing as a
substitute for any actual domestic policy. The largest killing facility in
wartime Croatia was the Jasenovac camp complex, a hundred kilometers
south of Zagreb. The Serbs were by far the largest victim group there,
though, in proportion to the size of their populations, the Gypsies and
Jews suffered far more.
Croatia as a state had no hope of surviving a German defeat, and in this
sense had no foreign policy and was not sovereign. Croatian authorities
deported Jews to Auschwitz in August 1942 and again in May 1943, after
most allies of Germany had ceased to do so. All in all about three-quarters
of the Jews in wartime Croatia were murdered.
—
Slovakia was the other German puppet that arose from the wreckage of a
multinational state destroyed by Germany. Czechoslovakia had been a
multinational but not a federal state, and Slovaks had understandable
grievances about the preponderance of Czechs in the administration of
Slovak territories. These issues would almost certainly not have brought
down democratic Czechoslovakia. In 1938, as he threatened
Czechoslovakia with German nationalism in the “Sudetenland,” Hitler
also encouraged Slovak separatism. The result was that a nationalist
fringe gained credibility and was able to join forces with the more
mainstream Slovak parties in a campaign for autonomy from Prague. The
Slovak state led by Jozef Tiso was created as a result of the German
destruction of Czechoslovakia in March 1939. During the transition from
Czechoslovak to Slovak law, Slovaks and others stole with enthusiasm

from the Jews. Tiso and the leaders of the new state saw this as part of a
natural process whereby Slovaks would displace Jews (and, in some
measure, Slovak Catholics would displace Slovak Protestants) as the
middle class. Laws expropriating Jews thus created an artificial Jewish
question: what to do with all of these impoverished people?
Slovakia joined the Axis in November 1940 and participated in the
German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941. That September
Slovakia passed its own discriminatory Jewish law. In October, Slovak
leaders came to an accord with Heinrich Himmler on the deportation of
their Jewish population to Auschwitz, and in December they received
assurances that those deported would not return. Though some twentythree thousand Jews did gain access to a bureaucratic exemption, about
fifty-eight thousand were deported, most of whom were murdered. In
March 1943, after the tide of war had turned, Slovak bishops intervened
on behalf of Jewish converts to Christianity and Christians of Jewish
origin. Slovak authorities then ceased deportations. In late August 1944,
as Soviet forces entered eastern Slovakia, the Slovak resistance began an
uprising against the Tiso regime. This brought a German invasion of the
country by the German army and an Einsatzgruppe, and the murder of a
further twelve thousand Jews. In the end, about three-quarters of the
Jews of Slovakia were killed.
—
Romania, Germany’s major military ally on the eastern front after 1941,
was the only other state to generate an autonomous policy of the direct
mass murder of Jews. Historically, antisemitism was far more integral to
Romanian political life than to German. In the nineteenth century, state
authorities had already identified and stigmatized Jews as a threat to
Romanian security; only foreign pressure from the western powers that
extended Romania’s territory after the First World War brought the Jews
inclusion as full citizens. Romania’s policy to deport and kill Jews began
during the Second World War in connection to a trauma of lost lands.
Romania did not lose statehood during the war, but it did lose state
territory. Regaining that land would become the central political
obsession in Bucharest; Jews on the territory that Romania lost would
later be the main victims of murderous new policies.

Romania had been regarded as one of the victor states after the First
World War; along with admonitions about equal treatment for Jews had
come massive territorial gains. Over the 1920s and 1930s, Bucharest’s
major institutional and political preoccupation was the romanianization
of these new lands. In a matter of a few weeks in the summer of 1940,
most of what had been gained was lost. The Soviet Union occupied
northeastern Romania (Bessarabia and northern Bukovina) in June and
July 1940 and annexed these territories that August. That same month,
Germany ordered Romania to grant northern Transylvania to Hungary.
Shortly afterwards Romania lost southern Dobruja to Bulgaria. Thus,
something like a third of the national territory and population vanished
that summer. The monarchy paid the price. The Romanian king, who had
declared himself to be a royal dictator, sought to divert the blame for his
weakness to the Jews. Those who deposed him blamed both him and the
Jews. In September 1940, General Ion Antonescu seized power with a
program of territorial restoration, governing at first with the fascist Iron
Guard.

Traditionally Romania had been a client of France, with whose culture
Romanian elites identified, whose language was widely spoken, and
whose foreign policy had brought Romania’s territorial gains after the
First World War. Germany had invaded and defeated France in spring
1940, and then forced Romania to cede territory to its neighbors. In this
situation, Antonescu’s only option, as he saw matters, was to ally with
Germany, on the logic that Paris no longer counted and Berlin could alter
borders. Romanian propaganda did not criticize German actions, but
instead focused on Soviet aggression. Jews lost all of their rights in
summer 1940. As part of Bucharest’s courting of Berlin, Romanian law
was modeled on German law. On January 7, 1941, Antonescu, visiting

Berlin, became the first foreign leader to learn of Hitler’s plan to invade
the Soviet Union. Hitler took the Romanian army seriously; after the
destruction of Poland, it was the only sizable force in eastern Europe that
could be exploited against the Red Army. Understanding Hitler’s
intentions and enjoying Hitler’s trust, Antonescu felt free to break with
the Iron Guard and govern alone.
When on July 2, 1941, Romanian troops joined the German Eleventh
Army in an attack on the USSR from Romanian territory, this was, like
the German campaign generally, a reinvasion. Romanian troops first
reached lands, northern Bukovina and Bessarabia, that had been part of
Romania until a year before, when the Red Army had occupied them. As
in the Baltic states, the Soviets were in the midst of mass deportations
when the Romanian reinvasion took place. On the night of June 12, three
weeks before the arrival of Romanian troops, the Soviet NKVD had
deported at least 26,173 Romanian citizens and arrested about 6,250
more. Like Germany, Romania portrayed the Soviet Union as a
Judeobolshevik state. Massive pogroms were initiated on Romanian
territory in the days before the invasion, far exceeding anything possible
in prewar Germany. As Romanian forces reinvaded the lands that had
been lost to the Soviets, they shot a large number of Jews in the towns,
killing some 43,500 in all.
The Romanian political rhetoric was similar to that presented by the
Germans. Both Hitler and Antonescu proclaimed a liberation from
Judeobolshevism. Germans were telling others (Poles, Ukrainians,
Lithuanians, Latvians, Estonians, Belarusians, and Russians) that Jews
were communists and communists were Jews. Romanians were telling
this to other Romanians. The Germans were unaware at first that most
collaboration with the Soviet order had not been Jewish. The Romanians
knew that they were creating an alibi for their own people by blaming the
Jews for Soviet rule. As elsewhere on the eastern front, the first reaction
of local people was personal score settling, with little or no account taken
of ethnicity. Romanian forces actually intended to protect local Soviet
collaborators who were not Jewish and to punish those who were, and
other Jews along the way. Their task was defined as “killing all Jews while
protecting pro-Soviet gentiles from the rage of their neighbors.” As local
Romanians understood, “Nobody except Jews was persecuted at this
time!” The ethnicization of guilt was fully planned and conscious.

Romanian soldiers quickly regained these prewar Romanian territories
and occupied a good deal of the south of Soviet Ukraine. Like German
soldiers, they were followed by special units whose initial assignment was
to provoke pogroms. On July 6, 1941, an order from Romanian
counterintelligence specified that pogroms were to be organized and
given the appearance of spontaneity. In several cases, local populations,
Romanians or Ukrainians, killed Jews before the arrival of Romanian
troops. As elsewhere, however, most people watched passively. Romanian
forces, like German ones in these same weeks, were frustrated that
pogroms were not more widespread. After the initial pogroms came a
general deportation of Jews from the recovered territories of Bessarabia
and northern Bukovina further east to Romanian-occupied territories of
the Soviet Union, known as “Transnistria.” Some Jews were deported
from one part of Transnistria to another. During these deportations, local
Romanians and others took advantage of the obvious exclusion of Jews
from legal protection. Some raped Jewish women. Others bribed
gendarmes for the right to pick prosperous-looking Jews from the
columns in order to murder them for their clothing. Nearly two hundred
thousand Jews were assembled in makeshift camps created from pigpens,
barns, and open fields, where they began to die almost immediately.
Those who survived these camps recalled that they were helped by local
people, especially women, who gave them food and water at risk to
themselves. Romanian troops, meanwhile, carried out mass shootings of
Jews as revenge for combat losses to the Red Army. After seventy
thousand Romanian troops were lost in the battle for Odessa in October
1941, Romanian soldiers shot twenty-six thousand Jews beyond the city.
All in all, this Romanian campaign of comprehensive deportation and
sporadic massacre resembled the contemporary German idea of shipping
the Jews to Siberia.
From the perspective of Bucharest, however, this anti-Jewish campaign
was an attempt at the ethnic cleansing of one of several enemies of the
Romanian state. It was carried out in zones where state territory had
changed hands twice in two years, and where Jews could be blamed for
defeat, scapegoated for collaboration, and eliminated under the cover of
war. Romanian authorities also planned to deport Jews from the central
part of the country untouched by war, but this proved difficult and in the
end did not take place. Romanian Jews in central Romania had never lost

their citizenship; there was no cover of war, nor any blame for
communism to allocate. Of the 280,000 or so Jews killed as a result of
Romanian policy, some 15,000 had lived in prewar Romania on
territories that had not changed hands during the war. This was, of
course, a significant number, but only about six percent of the total. Just
as 97 percent of the Jews killed by Germany had lived beyond prewar
Germany, so 94 percent of the Jews killed by Romania lived on territories
Romania had lost to the USSR or had gained from the USSR.
In 1942, Romanian policy towards Jews, previously quite cooperative
with the Germans, drifted in the other direction. Berlin wanted the
remaining Jews under Romanian control sent to Auschwitz, but none
were. Bucharest’s refusal had to do with calculations of sovereignty.
Romania was deporting and murdering Jews on the basis of its own
reasoning and for its own purposes. Romanian leaders were annoyed by
the high-handedness of the Germans sent to Bucharest to negotiate and
vexed that they were asked to deport their Jews while Hungarian Jews
and Italian Jews, citizens of other allies of Germany, remained at home.
They worried that the removal of Jews would benefit the German ethnic
minorities in towns in Transylvania and thus increase German influence
in Romania. Above all, Romanians were displeased that their
contribution to the war on the eastern front had not led to the return of
northern Transylvania from Hungary.
Romanian policy was to murder Jews as a minority that could be
removed during the war without larger political consequences. When this
calculation changed, so did policy. Romanian policy had also been to
deport and murder Gypsies under cover of war; since this policy was
coordinated with Jewish policy, it was halted by a kind of accident. In
October 1942, the Romanians halted their own deportations and ceased
their own killing policies. They also ended discussions of sending Jews to
Auschwitz. In 1943, Hitler tried and failed to change Antonescu’s mind.
Hitler’s argument was that Romania’s place in a future German Europe
depended upon its current attitude towards Jews; Antonescu was of the
opinion that the masses of Romanian corpses around Stalingrad were
sacrifice enough. Rather than send Jews to Auschwitz in 1943, Bucharest
once again extended its protection to Romanian Jews living abroad. The
following year Romania reversed its alliances, and its armies finished the
war fighting not alongside but against the Germans. All in all, about two-

thirds of Romania’s Jews survived.
The Romanian Holocaust began with the trauma of lost territory and
an associated change not just of government but of regime, from
monarchy to military dictatorship. It took place chiefly on the lands that
the new regime believed it could win back by force from the Soviet Union.
Romanian Jews in places where state territory did not change hands
usually saw the end of the war. Romanian Jews at the site of a double
regime change—where the Soviet Union destroyed Romanian state
structures and then Romania did the same to Soviet structures—usually
did not. The logic of the Romanian Holocaust was similar to that of the
German Holocaust, with one major exception: Antonescu, unlike Hitler,
saw his own state as worth protecting and thus considered the Jewish
question, antisemite though he was, to be one issue among others. When
the survival of the state was in question, Antonescu slowed the
persecution of Jews. Hitler, who actually believed in a world of races
rather than a world of states, did the opposite.
—
Under their longtime ruler, Regent Miklós Horthy, Hungarian leaders set
a course towards an alliance with Germany, always keeping an eye on
neighbor and rival Romania. Bucharest gained considerable territories
after the First World War; its gains then were a part of Budapest’s losses.
Hungary, treated as a defeated power, lost most of its territory and
population by the terms of the Treaty of Trianon of 1920. It recouped
some of these losses thanks to Germany twenty years later. As a result of
the destruction of Czechoslovakia, it was awarded southern Slovakia as
well as Subcarpathian Ruthenia. Romania’s loss of northern Transylvania
in summer 1940 was Hungary’s gain. All of these annexations, achieved
without military effort, bound Hungary to Germany. If Hitler could award
territory, he could also take it away. Romania fought alongside Germany
against the USSR to regain territory; Hungary joined that invasion so as
not to lose that same territory. Their war in the East was largely a contest
for German favor in the Transylvanian Question.

Budapest passed anti-Jewish legislation on the German model as a
signal of its loyalty to Berlin, but this did not, in itself, lead to mass
killing. The Jews in greatest danger were the ones who inhabited
territories newly acquired by the Hungarian state. Hungarian authorities
deported Jews from Subcarpathian Ruthenia across the Soviet border
just as Germany was invading the Soviet Union. These Jews were then
the victims of the first large-scale shooting of the Holocaust, at
Kamianets’ Podils’kyi in August 1941. Hungary joined its German ally in
the invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941, and Hungarian forces shot a
certain number of Jews there. The army also forced Jews into labor
battalions, which then worked in dreadful conditions in the occupied
Soviet Union. Some forty thousand Hungarian Jews perished in these
units. All the same, the Hungarian leadership never showed any interest

in deporting its Jewish citizens to Auschwitz. The government’s general
attitude was that a purge of national minorities could follow a victorious
war.
As a result, some eight hundred thousand Jews were still alive on
Hungarian territory in 1944. Since the vast majority of the three million
or so Polish Jews had already by this point been murdered, Hungary’s
was now the most significant Jewish community of central and eastern
Europe. In January and February 1943, the Hungarian army suffered
huge losses as the Red Army retook the city of Voronezh. The Hungarian
government began some clumsy attempts to make contact with the
western powers. Learning of this, Hitler blamed the Jews of Hungary. On
March 19, 1944, German troops entered Hungary; a few days later Döme
Sztójay, who had been serving in Berlin as Hungarian ambassador, was
named prime minister. It was this government, created in the unusual
circumstances of German occupation and constrained in its freedom of
action, which undertook to deport Hungarian Jews to German death
facilities.
The German invasion of Hungary was a strange operation, since its
purpose was to keep an allied state, and an allied army, in the war on the
German side. The point was not to force Hungary to carry out the Final
Solution, but rather to swing the balance of Hungarian politics
sufficiently so that it might be carried out. The government that the
Germans introduced in March 1944 was ideologically more antisemitic.
The calculation of the new government, perhaps more important than its
ideology, was that the deportation of Hungary’s Jews was the price to be
paid for the preservation of a Hungarian state. The German occupation
was not meant to exploit Hungarians economically, but to divert
economic calculations in such a way as to endanger Jews. Nazi ideology
presented the murder of Jews as an end in itself. But the strategic
calculation was that a Hungary culpable of murdering its Jews would be
unable to switch sides.
The expropriation of Jews, as both the German occupiers and the
Hungarian government understood, was an opportunity to gain a certain
amount of support from the majority population in the strange new
situation. That spring the Hungarian government announced a series of
reforms that depended, as everyone could tell, on the robbery, and thus
indirectly on the disappearance, of the Jews. The property of more than

four million dead European Jews having changed hands by this point in
time, the connection between expropriation and murder was clear to
everyone; and if businesses and apartments were to be transferred, the
government wanted to make the arrangements and get the credit.
German state destroyers entered Hungary: a Higher SS and Police Leader
alongside an Einsatzgruppe, the forces that organized the Final Solution
in the East, as well as Adolf Eichmann, the SS deportation specialist. In
practice, however, the work of deportation depended upon the records of
the Hungarian interior ministry and the work of Hungarian local
policemen. What this all meant was hardly a secret: On May 10 a New
York Times headline read “Hungarian Jews Fear Annihilation.” Between
May and July 1944, some 437,000 Jews were deported from Hungary to
Auschwitz, of whom about 320,000 were murdered.
Like all of Germany’s allies, regardless of their actual policies towards
Jews, Budapest considered the treatment of its own citizens to be a
matter of its own sovereign choices. This was true even of the Hungarian
rulers that the Germans chose in spring 1944, when Hungarian
sovereignty had been compromised but not eliminated by the German
invasion. In summer 1944, as circumstances changed, calculations
changed as well. That June, the western allies landed in Normandy and
the Red Army routed Germany’s Army Group Center in Belarus. The
Americans, after a series of warnings about Hungary’s treatment of Jews,
bombed Budapest on July 2. Horthy had remained head of state despite
the German intervention and the change of government. He now halted
the deportations, thereby sparing most of the Jews of Budapest. He tried
again and failed again in October 1944 to change sides. Even as Budapest
itself was besieged by the Red Army, the Germans wanted the city’s Jews
deported. A new fascist Arrow Cross government marked Jewish houses
in the capital and created a ghetto; the advance of the Soviets made
further transports to Auschwitz impossible. About a hundred thousand
Jews were forced to leave Budapest, thousands of whom died in labor
battalions. The Arrow Cross murdered about fifty Jews a day by the
Danube River.
In the end, about half of the Hungarian Jewish population survived.
Most of those killed had inhabited territories that changed hands during
the war. The vast majority perished after the German intervention that
compromised Hungarian sovereignty.

—
Bulgaria was the German ally least affected by the war. It never lost
territory to any of its neighbors. Bulgarians did not experience occupation
of any kind until the very end of the war. The Bulgarian army did not join
in the invasion of the Soviet Union. It did, however, take part in the
German campaigns against Yugoslavia and Greece in 1941, gaining some
of Thrace from the former and Macedonia from the latter. Bulgaria was
also granted southern Dobruja from Romania. Bulgarian authorities
deported about thirteen thousand Jews from Macedonia and Thrace,
following German wishes, on lands they gained thanks to German help.
Most of these children, women, and men were gassed at Treblinka.

The Bulgarian government also drew up plans for the deportation of
the Jews who inhabited prewar Bulgarian territory, but these were never
implemented. Bulgarian Jews often had friends, colleagues, or employers
who could explain their value to Bulgarian society. Letters from non-

Jewish Bulgarian citizens about Jewish Bulgarian citizens flooded
ministerial offices. In March 1943, after the tide of the war had turned,
Bulgarian parliamentarians protested the anticipated deportations. Their
resolution failed, but their public airing of the issue made a difference.
Leaders of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church intervened on behalf of the
Jews generally, and other Bulgarians issued public protests. In the end,
the king seems to have changed his mind about the desirability of
deporting Bulgarian Jews to their deaths, settling for a removal of Jews
from Sofia to the countryside. In 1944, Bulgaria reversed alliances and
finished the war on the side of the Allies.
All in all, about three-quarters of Jews on territory controlled by
Bulgaria survived. Almost all of those who were killed inhabited
territories where regimes had changed during the war.
—
Italy was Germany’s ally from the beginning, and its Duce, Benito
Mussolini, was one of Hitler’s inspirations. He, rather than Hitler,
pioneered the politics of anti-communism, and the deployment of
ideological paramilitaries to gain and then transform state power.
Mussolini did not, however, see the Soviet Union as part of a planetary
Jewish peril to be destroyed, nor did he imagine his Blackshirts as special
units with the power to return Europe to some racial Eden by killing
Jews. His major colonial aims and thus atrocities were in Africa. Italian
troops joined in the invasion of France belatedly and almost irrelevantly,
but participated in the invasion of the Soviet Union on a grand scale.
Insofar as Italy and its soldiers contributed to the conquest of Soviet
territory, they contributed indirectly to the Holocaust. The same, of
course, is true of Romania, Hungary, Slovakia, and all of the other
German allies on the eastern front. When Italy bungled its invasion of
Greece in 1940, it forced the Germans to intervene. In this way Italian
aggression created some of the preconditions to the Holocaust in
southeastern Europe.
Although Italy did pass anti-Jewish and other racial legislation,
Mussolini showed no interest in deporting Italian Jews to their deaths.
Beyond Italy, Italian soldiers sometimes sheltered Jews. In general, Jews
who had a choice would flee to zones of Italian occupation. As a matter of

prestige and sovereignty, Italy would intern rather than deport Jews who
escaped from Croatia. The Holocaust in Italy itself began, and could only
begin, after Mussolini’s fall. In Italy, as elsewhere, a failed attempt to
change sides was a disaster for Jews. When Italy’s new leaders tried to
join the Allies, Germany invaded from the north and undertook the
deportation and murder of Italian Jews themselves. In the end, about
four-fifths of Italy’s Jews survived; without German intervention, almost
all of them would have.
—
Jews who were citizens of Germany’s allies lived or died according to
certain general rules. Jews who maintained their prewar citizenship
usually lived, and those who did not usually died. Jews usually lost
citizenship through regime change or occupation rather than by law; slow
legal depatriation on the German model was the exception, not the rule.
Jews from territories that changed hands were usually murdered. Jews
almost never survived if they remained on territories where the Soviet
Union had been exercising power when German or Romanian forces
arrived. German occupation of states that were trying to switch sides led
to the massive killing of Jews, including those who lived in countries
where there had been little or nothing of a Final Solution. In all, about
seven hundred thousand Jews who were citizens of Germany’s allies were
killed. Yet a higher number survived. This is a dramatic contrast to the
lands where the state was destroyed, where almost all Jews were killed.
None of Germany’s sovereign allies was indifferent to the traditional
concern of preserving the state. Most of the sovereign states allied with
Germany altered their foreign policy in 1942 or 1943 or 1944, as it
became clear that Germany was losing the war. This meant reversing
anti-Jewish policies, attempting to switch sides in the war, or both. If
leaders slowed or halted their own anti-Jewish policies, it was in the hope
that the Allies would notice the signal and would treat them more
favorably after the war was over. Sometimes attempts to switch sides
succeeded and thereby aided the Jews, as in Romania and Bulgaria.
Sometimes they failed, as in Hungary and Italy. But it was this very
ability to make foreign policy that distinguished sovereign states from
puppet states created during the war and from the stateless zones.

This same capacity for diplomacy distinguished Germany’s allies from
Nazi Germany itself. Until 1942, the Jews of Germany were in a position
not so different from that of Germany’s allies. From 1942, however, the
position of Germany’s Jews worsened radically, whereas that of the Jews
of Germany’s allies generally improved (until and unless Germany itself
intervened). Unlike the leaders of Germany’s allies, Hitler was indifferent
to the fate of his own state, and viewed the extermination of Jews as a
good in and of itself. He thought that the world was a planet covered by
races rather than a globe covered by states—and acted accordingly.
Germany did not have a conventional foreign policy, since its Führer did
not believe in sovereignty as such and could imagine state destruction as
the proper end of the war just as easily as he could see it as the proper
beginning.
When the war turned against Germany, the killing of Jews under
German control was not slowed, as with Germany’s allies, but
accelerated. Because the German leadership was pursuing what it saw as
colonial (anti-Slavic) and decolonial (anti-Jewish) campaigns from the
beginning, Hitler and others could shift emphases from one war to
another, and from one definition of victory to another. The leaders of
Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, and Italy had to contemplate the actual
military conflict as it unfolded on staff maps. Hitler understood the
minutiae of war; indeed, he grasped its details far better than any other
head of state and better than most of his generals. But the way he
synthesized the data was his alone. For him the German defeats revealed
the hidden hand of the planetary Jewish enemy, whose destruction was
necessary to win the war and redeem mankind. The extermination of the
Jews was a victory for the species, regardless of the defeat of the
Germans. As Hitler said at the very end, on April 29, 1945, Jews were the
“world poisoners of all nations.” He was sure of his legacy: “I have lanced
the Jewish boil. Posterity will be eternally grateful to us.”
Hitler was seeking to lift a Jewish curse from the planet. This
categorical Nazi approach, once it was realized as policy, made possible
ethnic cleansing from other countries, since it created a place, Auschwitz,
where European Jews could be sent. The German mass murder of Jews
created an unusual opportunity for ethnic cleansers elsewhere in Europe,
creating possibilities for removing one (of many) unwanted minorities.
Such an interaction was possible only because the makers of the

Holocaust were realizing the desire to remove all Jews from the earth.
Hitler was not a German nationalist, sure of German victory, aiming
for an enlarged German state. He was a zoological anarchist who believed
that there was a true state of nature to be restored. The failed campaign
in the East brought useful new knowledge about nature: It turned out
that the Germans were not, in fact, a master race. Hitler had accepted this
possibility when he invaded the Soviet Union: “If the German people is
not strong enough and devoted enough to give its blood for its existence,
let it go and be destroyed by another, stronger man. I shall not shed tears
for the German people.” Over the course of the war, Hitler changed his
attitude towards the Soviet Union and the Russians: Stalin was not a tool
of the Jews but their enemy, the USSR was not or was no longer Jewish,
and its population turned out, upon investigation, not to be subhuman.
In the end, Hitler decided, “the future belongs entirely to the stronger
people of the east.”
—
In the European states linked by military occupation to Hitler’s strange
sense of destiny, the proportion of Jews who survived varied greatly. The
greatest confusion arises over the contrast between European states with
significant prewar Jewish populations: the Netherlands, Greece, and
France. About three-quarters of French Jews survived, whereas about
three-quarters of Dutch Jews and Greek Jews were killed.
Here, as with Estonia and Denmark, intuitions fail to explain this
enormous difference. In general, neither the Dutch nor the Greek
population was regarded as antisemitic, whereas observers then and
historians now chronicle a major current of antisemitism in French
popular and political life. In the Netherlands, Jewish refugees were
admitted without visas until 1938. In Greece, German-style antisemitism
had almost no advocates. Antisemitism was less resonant in interwar
Greek politics than just about anywhere in Europe. In the Netherlands,
uniquely, there were public manifestations against the introduction of
anti-Jewish laws after the German occupation. Persecution of the Jews in
the Netherlands had almost no public support. And yet a Dutch Jew or a
Greek Jew was three times more likely to be murdered than a French
Jew.

The Netherlands was, for several reasons, the closest approximation to
statelessness in western Europe. The sovereignty of the Netherlands was
compromised in several ways that were unusual in this part of the
continent. There was no head of state once Queen Wilhelmina left for
London in May 1940. The Dutch government followed her into exile. The
bureaucracy, in effect decapitated, was left with the instruction to behave
in a way that would best serve the Dutch nation. Uniquely in western
Europe, the SS sought and attained fundamental control of domestic
policy. Arthur Seyß-Inquart, an experienced state destroyer, was made
Reichskommissar for the occupied Netherlands. He had served as the
chancellor of Austria during the days when that country had ceased to be.
He was then deputy to Hans Frank in the General Government, the
colony created from Polish lands where, according to the Nazi
interpretation, there had never been a Polish state. Such reasoning was
never applied to the Netherlands, whose people were seen as racially
superior to the Poles, and indeed as part of the same racial group as the
Germans. It was nevertheless the state destroyers of the SS who filled the
vacuum of the missing Dutch government.
Amsterdam was the only west European city where the Germans
considered creating a ghetto. That such a discussion even took place
suggests the unusual dominance of the SS. German authorities withdrew
the plan after the Amsterdam city council and the Dutch government
objected. This reveals the difference between the occupied Netherlands
and occupied Poland, where no meaningfully autonomous local or
national authorities existed. The Dutch police, like the Polish police, was
however directly subordinate to the German occupier. As in Poland, the
Dutch police was purged, and its top leadership generally removed. A
large number of German policemen, some five thousand, monitored
Dutch subordinates. In the Netherlands, as in Poland, fragments of the
previous state order—indeed, institutions that had once represented
toleration—could be turned to the task of extermination. In Poland, the
legal Jewish councils of the 1930s were transformed under the Germans
into the Judenräte. In the Netherlands, all religions had been organized
into communities for purposes of legal recognition, and all citizens were
registered according to religion. This meant that the Germans could make
use of precise preexisting lists of Jewish citizens. Dutch citizens
protested, but it made little difference. The Dutch underground resisted,

but this, if anything, only brought more harm to Jews. The German and
Dutch police attended to districts where they believed the underground
functioned and, in the process, found Jews in hiding.
The situation of rescuers and dissidents was quite different in the
Netherlands than in Poland. People who hid Jews in the Netherlands, for
example, were usually either not punished or punished lightly. People
who protested anti-Jewish laws in public, such as Professor Rudolph
Cleveringa at Leiden University, were sent to camps but were not killed.
His Polish colleagues in Cracow or Lwów, meanwhile, were murdered for
doing nothing other than being professors.
The Dutch were treated as citizens of an occupied country, unless they
were Jewish. Because the Netherlands lacked basic institutions of
sovereignty, and because Dutch institutions were fragmented on the east
European model, the outcome for the Jews was similar, although not
quite as awful, as in the stateless zones. The first transport of Dutch Jews
to Auschwitz was in July 1942. Because there was no sovereign state
functioning, there was no foreign policy, and no ability to change course
in 1943. The Germans determined what happened to Jews, which meant
that the trains from the Netherlands to Auschwitz kept running through
1944.
—
Greek sovereignty was also severely compromised, although in a different
way. Greece was originally invaded by Italy in late 1940. The Greek army
fought the Italians to a standstill, forcing Hitler to rescue Mussolini. The
Greek dictator died at what proved to be a critical moment. Germany
invaded Greece on April 6, 1941. The king and the government had fled
the country by the end of the month. The Germans did not seek to destroy
the state in Greece as they had done in Poland, but in these unusual
circumstances created an occupation regime in which the Greek puppet
government was powerless. Greece lost territory and was occupied by
three separate powers: the Germans took the north, allowed the Italians
to control the south, and granted part of Macedonia to Bulgaria. No
Greek government exercising any real authority was formed during the
war. Its head had to submit his nominations for ministerial positions to
both the German and the Italian authorities. There was never a Greek

foreign minister. The Germans and the Italians did not allow the Greek
government to apply for the international recognition of the new regime
in its new borders. Greek authorities were unable to control food
supplies. Some forty thousand Greeks starved in the first year of the war.
The murder of Greek Jews proceeded where the Germans were in
control. Italians saw the Ladino-speaking Jews of Greece, descendants of
people who had fled centuries before from Spain, as members of their
own Latin civilization. Italian officials provided many such people with
bogus attestations of Italian nationality. Salonika, the major Jewish city
in Greece, was under German occupation from April 1941. Although the
Germans found that “for the average Greek there is no Jewish question,”
local political and professional elites understood that lawlessness and
German priorities could be used to fulfill their own desires. If Jews were
no longer citizens of what was no longer really a state, others could make
good on prewar claims and satisfy half-hidden desires.
In summer 1942, as the Germans were desperate for labor, local Greek
authorities suggested that it might be more politic to use only Jews. This
stigmatized one section of the population and confirmed its vulnerability.
Later that year in Salonika, the German authorities satisfied a longstanding local postulate by ceding the property of the Jewish cemetery to
the city. Such a major property transfer generated a sense of material
complicity between Germans and locals as well as a new moral barrier
between non-Jewish Greeks and Greek Jews. The destruction of the
ancient cemetery and the desecration of hundreds of thousands of
remains was painful enough in the present, but also raised a question
about the future. If Salonika’s Jews were no longer welcome to die in
their home city, where would they die?
In the first weeks of 1943, some of Adolf Eichmann’s closest colleagues
arrived in Salonika with the goal of arranging rapid deportations to
Auschwitz. They found little public sympathy for their ideology, it seems,
but more than sufficient willingness to exploit the separation of Jews
from other Greeks. As Salonika Jews were ordered to wear stars and
forced into ghettos, others took their movable property and sometimes
their houses. The deportations began on March 15, 1943, the Jews
exchanging their Greek drachmas for counterfeit Polish currency. Some
43,850 children, women, and men were sent from Salonika to Auschwitz
between March and June 1943. The timing was unusual: right after the

German defeat at Stalingrad, when German allies were generally trying to
switch sides, or change their Jewish policy as a signal to the Allies. But
Greece, although regarded by the Germans as an occupied state, was
much more like a stateless territory. It had no army in the war that might
change sides, and no foreign minister who might send peace signals.
—
The French case was very different. The very notion of “collaboration”
with Germany, although it has taken on other meanings since, was coined
by the French to denote a policy of one sovereign state choosing to
cooperate with another. France, in contrast to the Netherlands and to
Greece, did retain the basic institutions of sovereignty, and its leaders
chose a policy of friendship with the German victors. After Hitler’s armies
crushed the French in spring 1940, he expressed the wish that “a French
government continue to function on French territory.” Because France,
unlike the Netherlands and Greece, was placed under a traditional
military occupation, there was no clear opening for the SS and its state
destroyers. The new regime, with Philippe Pétain as head of state and
with Vichy as the administrative center, was regarded as the legitimate
continuator of the prewar republic, both at home and abroad. High
officials in all ministries remained in their positions. Indeed, the number
of French bureaucrats increased quite impressively during the German
occupation, from about 650,000 to about 900,000. The contrast here
with Poland is instructive: For every educated Pole who was murdered
during the war, an educated Frenchman got a job in the civil service.
France did introduce anti-Jewish legislation on its own initiative. A
“Jewish statute” was passed on October 3, 1940, breaking the long French
tradition of treating all citizens in metropolitan France as equal members
of the state. (Algeria, though at this time part of the French state, was a
different story.) In March 1941, a General Commissariat for Jewish
Questions was established to coordinate Jewish policy with Germany.
The legalized theft of Jewish property began in France that July. In
November, the French government created an official Jewish
organization that all Jews in France were required to join. The prevailing
idea among French authorities was that Jews could eventually be
removed to somewhere distant—such as Madagascar. The new laws were

implemented by people who had served the prewar republic.
The reasoning behind French Jewish policy was different than that of
Nazi Germany and closer to that of, for example, Slovakia or Bulgaria. In
Bratislava and Sofia, as in Vichy, a domestic constituency for ethnic
cleansing found itself in an unusual situation: Another state, Germany,
actually wished to take some (not all) of the people deemed undesirable.
In the late 1930s, before the war, the French Republic had already passed
a law permitting the creation of “assembly points,” for Jewish and other
refugees. The first of these camps had been established in February 1939.
Under the Vichy regime in 1940, the prewar aspiration to limit and
control immigration became the open plan to make France an ethnically
homogeneous state. Jews without citizenship, along with others who
lacked citizenship, were to be removed. After the passage of the “Jewish
Statute,” foreign Jews were sent to camps. About 7,055 French Jews were
denaturalized and thereby placed in the category of greater risk, that of
foreign Jews. Policy in France then followed the logic of escalation that
was visible in eastern Europe. Major raids and roundups of Jews by the
French police were timed with the German invasion of the Soviet Union
in summer 1941, with the reversal of the German offensive that winter,
and then as retaliation for (very real) French communist resistance in
March 1942. By summer 1942, the French roundups included Jewish
women and children. Jews in Paris were taken to Drancy, where they
were selected for transport to Auschwitz and death.
French and German policies met at a certain precise point. The French
placed Jews without French citizenship in camps. The Germans wanted
to take such people, but only insofar as the Germans themselves could
consider them stateless. Crucially, Nazi malice stopped at the passport:
As much as Nazis might have imagined that states were artificial
creations, they did not proceed with killing Jews until states were actually
destroyed or had renounced their own Jews. The French were willing to
round up Jews from Hungary and Turkey, for example, but the Germans
were unwilling to kill such people without the consent of the Hungarian
and Turkish governments. Germany was entirely willing to murder Jews
of Polish and Soviet citizenship, since it considered these states to be
defunct. Germany was also willing to take and murder French Jews, but
only under the condition that French authorities first stripped such
people of citizenship. This the French authorities at first showed a certain

inclination to do, although complications of law and bureaucracy delayed
the process considerably.
In summer 1942, when the Germans demanded a greater number of
French Jews, the highest French authorities reconsidered the question of
depriving their own citizens of citizenship. Depatriation was not, for
them, a Jewish question, but rather a sovereignty question. After the tide
of war visibly turned at Stalingrad in February 1943, French authorities
decided not to depatriate any more French Jews. In July 1943, efforts to
strip French citizenship from Jews nationalized after 1927 (about half of
the Jews who were French citizens) were abandoned. The Holocaust
continued in France as a German policy executed with a certain amount
of local French collaboration, bringing general terror to French Jews in
hiding but achieving relatively little success. A large majority of French
Jews, about three-quarters, survived the war.
The decisive matter, here as everywhere, was sovereignty. For French
authorities, the Jewish question was subordinate to that of the wellbeing, as they saw matters, of their state. They certainly wished to remove
Jews from France—foreign Jews to be sure and, no doubt, most or all
Jews. But they could see the inherent problem of allowing German
preferences to determine their own citizenship policy. The moment a
state no longer determines internal membership, it loses external
sovereignty. By the same token, French authorities had recourse to
foreign policy and could react to the course of the war. Unlike the Dutch
and the Greeks, who had lost these elements of sovereignty, the French
could respond to Allied pressure about the Jews and anticipate a British
and American occupation, which was indeed coming.
The Holocaust in France was mainly a crime against Jews who, from a
French perspective, were foreign. As François Darlan, head of
government in 1941 and 1942, put it: “The stateless Jews who have
thronged to our country for the last fifteen years do not interest me.”
Jews without French citizenship were about ten times more likely to be
deported to Auschwitz than were Jews with French citizenship. At
Drancy, Jews were selected for deportation according to the vitality of
their state. Jews in France understood this perfectly. In 1939, when
Poland was destroyed by the joint German-Soviet invasion, Polish Jews
living in France flocked to the Soviet embassy in Paris. This was not out
of any love for the Soviet Union or communism. They simply knew that

they needed state protection. Between September 1939 and June 1941,
documents from Hitler’s Soviet ally were of great value. But when Hitler
betrayed Stalin, and Germany invaded the Soviet Union, these Jews’ new
papers were suddenly useless.
Considerably more Polish Jews resident in France were killed than
French Jews resident in France. Statelessness followed these thirty
thousand murdered Polish Jews to Paris, to Drancy, to Auschwitz, to the
gas chambers, to the crematoria, and to oblivion.
—
The likelihood that Jews would be sent to their deaths depended upon the
durability of institutions of state sovereignty and the continuity of prewar
citizenship. These structures created the matrix within which individual
choices were made, the constraints upon those who did evil, and the
possibilities for those who wished to do good.

10
The Grey Saviors

In the world that Hitler imagined, killers felt no responsibility for what
they did. There was no source of ethical authority for individual action,
and no basis for reciprocal social or political relationships: There was
nothing except an eternal war among races. In this struggle the Jews were
the only immoral ones, since they undercut the natural justice of German
victory and thereby the only order that could prevail on the planet. Where
the Holocaust took place, states were destroyed, laws abolished, and the
predictability of daily life undone. In this grotesque situation the Jews
themselves had to bear all of the responsibility for their own lives, for
taking extraordinary action, again and again, over days, months, years, in
a setting beyond their understanding and their control.
Every Jew who survived the Holocaust had to fight collective inertia,
abandon the familiar and the beloved, and confront the unfathomable.
Every Jew had some exposure to antisemitism, but nothing in the
collective experience of millions of Jews over thousands of years was
preparation for what began in 1941. The synthesis of information into
knowledge depends upon familiarity, and nothing like the Holocaust had
ever happened before. The conversion of knowledge into action was
imperiled by hope. Any Jew could imagine that he or she would be spared
what was happening to others; the bare fact of life continuing from one
moment to the next seemed to suggest the possibility of its further
continuation. The certainty of death was hard to confront. It was often
difficult to accept that simply doing nothing would be followed by
murder. Even a Jew who grasped all that could be grasped of the
unprecedented situation, and took every initiative that could be taken,
would very likely die.

Almost every Jew who survived had some help from non-Jews, of one
kind or another, and usually of many different kinds. Whether Jewish
appeals for help would resound depended on both the addressee and the
setting. Martha Bernstein, the wife of a cantor in Zweibrücken in
southwestern Germany, was someone whose appeal was heard, in a very
special set of circumstances, only some of which she understood. Her
husband, Eleazar Bernstein, was a man of good deeds and social
conscience, who visited prisons to bring cheer and counsel to Jewish
prisoners. In one prison, Eleazar befriended Kurt Trimborn, whom he
knew as a prison guard and a police captain. The two men played chess.
On November 10, 1938, Eleazar Bernstein was arrested in the wake of
Kristallnacht, as were thousands of other Jewish men throughout
Germany. Martha crossed the rioting city to find Trimborn and ask for
help. She was unaware of the extent of his authority in this particular
situation. He told her that they must act quickly before the SS assumed
control; in fact, he was the SS. He had been a member of the Nazi party
since 1923 and exemplified the interpenetration of the SS and the
Criminal Police (Kripo) in the 1930s. He told Martha to go home and
pack. Trimborn had his friend released from custody and then drove the
couple and their children to the French border in his own car and got
them across. He then seems to have arranged the paperwork to create the
appearance that the family had been deported to a concentration camp.
The Bernstein family would eventually reach the United States, where
they prospered. Eleazar sent Trimborn a letter about the good that was
done: He wrote of his daughter who had become a teacher in America,
the sons who had become engineers, the grandchildren. All of this thanks
to Trimborn.
The letter was written later, much later, in 1978, after Trimborn’s trial
for murder.
In Einsatzgruppe D, first in German-occupied Soviet Ukraine and then
in German-occupied Soviet Russia, Kurt Trimborn ordered hundreds of
Jews to be murdered and carried out neck shots himself. In at least one
case he herded children from an orphanage into a gas van. In the East in
1942, he must have heard pleas for help, as he had in 1938 in Germany.
At his trial he said that he had not liked the task of killing civilians and
that he had, in some cases, allowed Jews to escape. This is quite possible.
He was, after all, the same man. In one setting he was a rescuer, and in

another a killer.
In 1938 in Germany, a game of war with clear rules, chess, had led
Trimborn to become a friend and a protector. In 1942, in a war beyond
Germany where all rules were rejected, Trimborn became a criminal. He
used one automobile in 1938 to save three children; he used another in
1942 to kill hundreds: An engine starts, a gas pedal goes down, but in the
one case people are driven to freedom and in the other they are
asphyxiated. One of Bernstein’s children lives today in California in a
house full of chess sets. Trimborn’s own children did not even know that
their father knew the rules.
—
Most German Jews emigrated before the mass murder began. Most of the
Jews who remained in Germany were killed, but only after being
deported to a stateless zone, and thereby placed in a helpless situation. In
some cases they were shot immediately; in others they joined local Jews
in ghettos. Without prior human contacts, and without the local
languages, German Jews once deported were almost never rescued. The
East was for them a foreign land, just as it was for other Germans. One
German Jewish woman, after her deportation to Riga, was brought to the
death pits of the Rumbula Forest. Just before she was shot, she called
out: “I die for Germany!” The local Jew who heard and recorded this
exclamation was astonished by this cry from some other world.
No one can know what the doomed woman was thinking, but her dying
commitment was far from absurd. The Germany from which she had
been extruded was something that German Jews had helped to build.
German Jews identified with Germany as strongly, or perhaps more
strongly, than other Germans; its collapse into antisemitism and murder
was for this reason a special sort of tragedy; their particular experience of
the rise and fall of German civilization, limited to them and alien to the
vast majority of European Jews, continues to structure our
understanding of the Holocaust.
Only about three percent of the victims of the Holocaust were German
Jews. For the Jews of eastern Europe, the vast majority of the victims,
Germany was not something that Jews had cocreated but rather
something that destroyed Jews. In his “Death Fugue,” one of the great

short poems of the last century, Paul Celan called death itself a “master
from Germany.” The Polish literary critic Michał Głowiński wrote of the
experience of his boyhood in his memoir The Black Seasons: “My image
of the Germans—or rather my image of a German, since my image of the
whole nation was embodied in an individual and what the individual did
—was extremely straightforward: at any given moment he seeks to
murder me, you, someone else. And he will carry out this desire without
fail the moment you fall into his hands.”
Głowiński, as a young boy in hiding, once played chess with a Polish
blackmailer while his aunt sought the money that would save their lives.
If his aunt had not succeeded, he would, in all likelihood, have been
delivered to a German who would have made sure that he was killed.
Głowiński’s memory of his boyhood is an accurate presentation of how
most Germans behaved in the places where German (or Soviet and then
German) power had destroyed the state. These zones of statelessness
became places of death for Jews who had lived there before the war as
well as for Jews brought there during the war.
The degree of statelessness was so crucial to the life chances of
Europeans beyond Germany in part because it was important to the
behavior of Germans themselves. The mutation of the German polity
after 1933—the creation of a party-state, the establishment of camps, the
hybridization of institutions, the discrimination of Jews—gave millions of
Germans a taste of the pleasures of lawlessness. During the war, most
German policemen comported themselves in one way in Germany and in
an entirely different way when dispatched to the East. German soldiers
who had previously occupied the peaceful Loire Valley in France could
shoot Jews right after they arrived in Belarus. The Order Police of the
prosperous northern German port city of Bremen could assemble the
Jews of Kyiv at Babyi Iar for the largest mass shooting of civilians in
history. Literally nothing could have prepared them for it, and in any case
they had no special training for such actions. Yet these policemen were
among those who organized and oversaw the killing and who attended a
celebratory dinner afterwards. Later they went back to Bremen and to
directing traffic.
—

A lesser known but equally striking example is that of the millions of
German women working for the German occupation authorities in the
East or accompanying their husbands or lovers on assignments there.
About half a million German women served as “helpers” of the
Wehrmacht, and another ten thousand as “helpers” of the SS. Precisely
because the occupied East was governed as a kind of anarchic colony, the
flexibility and individual initiative of these women must have been
crucial. It goes without saying that they knew about the Holocaust, since
many of them saw murders, heard about murders, or wrote and
transmitted the reports about murders.
A few German women were direct participants in the killing. Twenty of
the guards at Majdanek, for example, were women. This was a
concentration camp in the Lublin District of the General Government
that became, over time, an extermination facility as well. Some fifty
thousand Jews were gassed to death there. These women had their first
experience of work as guards in Ravensbrück, the major concentration
camp for females in Germany. There they were employed in what was, in
effect, a lawless zone inside Germany itself. In Majdanek they were
employed in a similar facility, but now surrounded by an anarchic
German colony. They took part in the killing of Jews and other prisoners,
for example by helping to select who was to labor and who was to be
gassed.
Further east, in places such as Latvia and Ukraine, a few German
women murdered Jews without the structure and experience provided by
such facilities and indeed without any orders to do so. These women went
beyond their instructions, in the spirit of what they saw and heard around
them every day. German women who killed or took part in the killing of
Jews during the war lived unremarkable lives in Germany before the war,
and, unless they were prosecuted, which was rare, lived normal lives in
Germany after the war. The role that German women played in mass
killing was probably indispensable, but women were not taken seriously
as actors during the war and were therefore able to shelter themselves
after the war. Sometimes they spoke to their daughters.
If statelessness drew German women to the East to become murderers,
the fact that Nazi Germany was a state attracted Jewish women from the
East. From the perspective of Jewish women in occupied Poland or in the
occupied Soviet Union, Germany could be a relatively safe place. Jewish

women presented themselves to German occupation authorities as
gentiles and asked for labor assignments in Germany, believing, quite
correctly, that their chances for survival were higher there. If a woman
had a contact in the Polish or Soviet underground (or, more rarely, with a
sympathetic German) who could arrange false papers, she could work in
relative security in Germany, pretending to be a Pole or a Ukrainian or
someone else. For men this was much harder, since Jewish males bore an
identifying mark, the circumcision, which could always be checked and
would always be a source of anxiety. For Jewish women, however, false
documents were a step back toward the world of recognition by the state.
To be sure, they were stigmatized as racial inferiors in Germany: Those
from Poland wore a patch with a P, those from the USSR a patch with the
word Ost. All were required to live a life only of labor and could expect
heavy punishments for breaking rules. Some died from poor working
conditions, some were executed for breaking rules, a few were murdered.
Nevertheless, a piece of paper that permitted a return to a zone where
some kind of law functioned usually meant life.
The end of states meant the end of state protection, and the scramble
for the next best thing. When whole countries ceased to be, old passports
and identity documents became useless by the million. New ones had to
be acquired one by one, and usually on German (or Soviet) terms. The
importance of documentation and citizenship was perfectly clear at the
time. In the eastern Polish city of Lwów, surrounded by Ukrainians and
largely inhabited by Jews, occupied by the Soviets in 1939, the Germans
in 1941, and the Soviets again in 1944, a certain lapidary bit of wisdom
made the rounds: “The passport is what holds body and soul together.”
This meant that the people who had the power to rescue others were
those who could dispense identity documents.
In eastern Europe most people understood the importance of regime
transitions, and with time the western Allies also came to grasp the
importance of documents. An attempt by the United States to rescue
Jews depended precisely on the provision of documents and thus the
extension of state recognition. In 1944, Washington appealed, under the
auspices of the War Refugee Board, to European neutral states to use
their diplomats to rescue Jews. Sweden cooperated with this plan,
providing an amateur diplomat named Raoul Wallenberg. He was to
enter Hungary in 1944, with the mission of extending to Hungarian Jews

the protection of the Swedish state. Wallenberg did have backing from his
own government and from the Americans, but he also knew that he was
opposing German policy and provoking Hungarian fascists. Nevertheless,
he issued something like fifteen thousand “protection passports,” and
probably saved more Jews than anyone else.
—
Wallenberg, an exceptional man, represented a certain class of rescuer,
diplomats who, by virtue of their position, embodied state sovereignty
and could confer state recognition. In general, the only people who could
rescue Jews in large numbers were those who had some direct connection
to a state and some authorization to dispense its protection. A diplomat
could grant to a Jew a passport or at least a travel document—an
invitation to return to the world of human reciprocity, in which a person
must be treated as a person because he is represented by a state.
Wallenberg was a businessman who chose and was chosen to act as a
diplomat at a crucial moment: the German occupation of Hungary, when
the largest remaining population of European Jews was under threat. Yet
there were also other professional diplomats who found themselves
serving in situations where the sovereignty of the states in which they
worked was compromised, who understood that this was a disaster for
Jews, and who chose to try to save them.
One such man was Ho Feng-Shan, the consul of the Republic of China
in Vienna when Austria was incorporated by Germany in March 1938. Ho
identified with the Austrian state and nation, and he sympathized with
Chancellor Schuschnigg in his resistance to the Nazis, whom he regarded
as “the devil.” Ho took a rather unusual view of the essence of national
greatness, believing that it was “only possible through inclusion and
tolerance.” His response to the “scrubbing parties” and pogroms that
followed the collapse of Austria was to give Chinese visas to Jews. He
issued at least a thousand, some of them to people whom he personally
extracted from concentration camps. Ho could not have known in 1938
what fate awaited Jews who remained in central Europe, but he was
responding to what was, at the time, an unprecedented outbreak of
violence against them.
After the German occupation of the Netherlands in spring 1940, the

Swiss consul, Ernst Prodolliet, issued Swiss transit visas to Jews. He was
ignoring instructions to the contrary. When the Swiss consulate was
closed in 1942, he left its funds with people who were trying to help Jews
escape from Europe. As German forces reached France that same spring,
French Jews fled southward, where some found assistance from
diplomats who allowed them to continue their flight. In Bordeaux, the
Spanish consul Eduardo Propper de Callejón issued thousands of transit
documents to Jews and others. He was one of several Spanish diplomats
throughout occupied Europe who worked in this direction. Aristides de
Sousa Mendes, a Portuguese consul in the same city, also issued
thousands of documents that allowed Jews and others to leave France.
These men were assisting total strangers. They were using the authority
inherent in their positions against prevailing policy.
—
A diplomatic rescuer whose actions were closer to official policy was
Chiune Sugihara, the Japanese consul in Kaunas, Lithuania. He was
assigned to Lithuania in 1939 in order to observe German and Soviet
troop movements and predict the outbreak of the German-Soviet war.
After September 1939, citizens of Poland, Jews and non-Jews alike, fled
both the Germans and the Soviets to Lithuania. Particularly after the
Soviets incorporated eastern Poland and began deportations to the Gulag,
Jews sought refuge in Lithuania. The Soviet deportations of April 1940,
which targeted Jews in large numbers, caused a mass flight of Jews to
Vilnius and Lithuania generally. In Vilnius that month, some 11,030
Jewish refugees were registered. At the very moment when the Soviet
Union occupied Lithuania, in June 1940, it was also carrying out another
wave of deportations of Polish citizens, chiefly Jews. This brought a
double panic among Jews: they had fled Soviet power in Poland only to
find themselves pursued by Soviet power to Lithuania. They found in the
Japanese consul a sympathetic listener.
In the 1930s, Sugihara had learned Russian, married a Russian woman,
and converted to Russian Orthodoxy; he wanted people to call him
Sergei. He spoke Russian with his colleagues in Polish military
intelligence in the 1930s, as they all cooperated in the Promethean
project and in other anti-Soviet plans. During the war, even after Poland

was destroyed in September 1939, he continued to work with Polish
officers in the Baltic states. His main contact was Michał Rybikowski,
who was running an Allied spy network from neutral Sweden and
reporting to the Polish government-in-exile in London. Rybikowski was
posing as a Russian and using a passport from the Japanese protectorate
Manchukuo, which he presumably obtained from Sugihara. (Because
there were many Russian emigrants in Manchukuo, a European with
such a passport, especially a Russian speaker such as Rybikowski, would
not attract attention.) The cooperation between Sugihara and Rybikowski
prepared the way for Sugihara’s eventual action to help Jews.
One of Rybikowski’s assignments was to manage the consequences of
the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact and the German-Soviet invasion and
occupation of Poland by aiding Polish refugees. His particular task in
Lithuania was to prepare an escape route for Polish citizens who had
gotten that far and wished to continue their flight from Europe. To this
end he recruited two further officers of Polish military intelligence,
Leszek Daszkiewicz and Alfons Jakubianec, who got passports from
Sugihara and were employed by the Japanese consulate.
The scheme that the Polish intelligence officers invented for Polish
refugees was to get a Japanese transit visa for a destination that did not
demand an entrance visa. Jan Zwartendijk, the honorary Dutch consul,
was willing to sign a declaration to the effect that entering Curaçao, an
island in the south of the Caribbean Sea that was a Dutch colony, did not
require a visa. The two Poles created a template for a special Japanese
transit visa for travel to Curaçao as well as two special visa stamps, one
for themselves and one for Sugihara. The original idea, as seen from the
perspective of the Polish government-in-exile, was to save Polish citizens
who were particularly valuable. Since transit was to be by train across the
Soviet Union to Japan, the intelligence officers no doubt hoped to gather
useful information from their handpicked refugees.
In the chaos of the summer of 1940, as the Soviets deported masses of
people from eastern Poland and established their new regime in
Lithuania, the three men gave visas to everyone who asked. Of the 3,500
or so visas they issued to Polish citizens, about two-thirds were given to
Polish Jews. Since one visa sufficed for a family, some eight thousand
Jews left Europe thanks to these documents. Like Ho in Vienna two years
earlier, Sugihara could not have known what would happen to Jews if

they remained in Lithuania. He was reacting to the refugee crisis brought
on by the German occupation of western and central Poland and the
Soviet occupation of eastern Poland and Lithuania. Nevertheless, he
clearly felt sympathy for refugees and wished for them to survive; in this
sense he consciously rescued Jews. He described the source of his actions
at least once, in a brief memoir written in Russian, “as my sense of
humanity, from love for my fellow human being.” Daszkiewicz, not at all a
sentimental man, wrote later that Sugihara was “a man who had a good
heart.”
Once they had done what they could, Sugihara and his two Polish
employees left Kaunas for Stockholm and traveled from there to
Germany. Sugihara’s mission was to predict when the Germans would
attack the Soviet Union—which he estimated correctly within a few days.
Shortly after Operation Barbarossa began on June 22, 1941, one of his
two Polish confederates, Jakubianec, was discovered by the Gestapo in
Berlin, and shot as a spy. Although Jakubianec was working with the
Japanese, he was reporting to his superior Rybikowski, who was serving
the Polish government-in-exile and thus Britain and the United States.
His execution was the end of a man who had invented a scheme that had
saved thousands of Jews. But he was not executed for that, or
remembered for that, or indeed for anything. His refugee scheme had
nothing to do with sympathy for Jews; it was a clever manipulation of the
artifacts of collapsing statecraft.
Daszkiewicz continued working for Sugihara, now in Prague, within the
Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia and thus in the Reich. He tried to
make contact with the Czech underground. The discovery and death of
his friend Jakubianec forced him to leave Europe. He chose to work in
Palestine, a traditional terrain for Polish intelligence operatives.
—
During the Second World War, Palestine was still under a British
Mandate, and Poland was a British ally. Before the war, Poland had been
pursuing an anti-British policy in Palestine, preparing Jewish
revolutionaries for their moment of opportunity: a war or a moment of
British weakness. The prewar Polish consul, Witold Hulanicki, remained
in Jerusalem during the war, working for the British, while maintaining

his relationship with his main Jewish contact and friend, Avraham Stern.
It was Stern, ever the seeker of risk and glory, who saw the Second World
War as the chance to defeat the British, even going so far as to solicit the
help of Nazi Germany (without success). In a tiny group known as Lehi,
Stern exploited Polish training and probably Polish weapons in a
campaign of violence against the British. He was fulfilling his political
program, but also pursuing a spectacularly enunciated death wish. He
met the ideal fate of the Polish Romantic rebels whose martyrological
ideas he deepened in his own poetry. After Stern was shot and killed by a
British policeman in 1942, the work of Lehi was continued by Yitzhak
Shamir. The next year Shamir’s partner in anti-British violence would be
Menachem Begin, who in 1942 was on his way to Palestine by a very
circuitous route.
In the late 1930s, Begin and the young men of Betar had planned to
create a State of Israel by descending upon Palestine to support an
uprising initiated by Irgun. This was an operation that was to be carried
out by Jews who were Polish citizens with the support of the Polish
authorities. The destruction of the Polish state in 1939 made such
schemes impossible, as Polish aid to Irgun collapsed and the leaders of
Betar did their best to flee to Vilnius. Some were placed in ghettos by the
Germans; others were arrested and deported by the Soviets. Begin
himself was among the Betar activists deported to the Gulag in 1940.
When Nazi Germany attacked the Soviet Union in 1941, Stalin altered
his attitude towards the male Polish citizens in his custody. They were to
be allowed to leave the Gulag and form a Polish army to fight against the
Germans. Stalin had no interest in Polish citizens fighting on the eastern
front, where they might later pose a problem for Soviet power. The Red
Army had, after all, invaded Poland once already during the war, and
these were precisely the people who had experienced oppression by the
NKVD. Best then to force them to fight on the western front, far from the
USSR and Poland, where ideally they could kill Germans and die
themselves. In order for Polish citizens to travel from the Gulag to the
western front, they had to journey from one end of the Eurasian
landmass to the other, from the Soviet north, far east, or Kazakhstan
through India and Iran and Palestine to western Europe.
This new Polish armed force, created at the sufferance of Stalin and
subordinate to the Polish government in London, was commanded by

Władysław Anders and so known as the Anders Army. Many of the
commanders of the Anders Army had little interest in Jews or held
antisemitic stereotypes about their value in combat. But Jews were,
nevertheless, among the Polish citizens who joined its ranks. For
whatever reason—because they were more likely to be targeted by Stalin,
because they were more eager to fight, or because they had better
relations with Polish officers—Betar members and Revisionist Zionists
were present in the Polish army in considerable numbers. In this way
many right-wing Zionists did make their march from Poland to Palestine,
if by a very long and indirect route. The British stopped Jews who tried to
come to Palestine by sea during the war, but they could hardly stop Jews
who came by land in Allied uniforms.

The arrival of these Jews in Palestine revitalized Irgun. Begin reached
Palestine with the Polish army in May 1942. There he encountered
Wiktor Drymmer, who as director of Poland’s Jewish policy in the late
1930s had been Begin’s patron. Drymmer had worked to create the
conditions for a large migration of Polish Jews to Palestine by way of
supporting Betar and Irgun. Now he helped to arrange Begin’s honorable
discharge from the Polish army, so that he need not face the shame of
desertion as he left a conventional armed force to serve an
unconventional one. When Begin was chosen to lead Irgun in October

1943, the only clothing he owned was his Polish army uniform.
Now that the war had turned decisively against Nazi Germany, Begin’s
Irgun joined Shamir’s Lehi in anti-British terrorism. This meant that two
Polish Jews were leading the anti-colonial resistance against Poland’s
ally. In February 1944, Begin declared the revolt of Irgun against the
British mandatory government. Begin was in every conceivable way a
product of Poland. His deputy in Irgun was Eliahu Meridor, who had
lived in Poland until 1936 and had returned for training by Polish
military intelligence in 1939. Moshe Nechmad, responsible for Irgun
operations in the Haifa district, had also taken part in the exercises in
Poland in 1939. Eliahu Lankin, the Jerusalem commander of Irgun who
led the attack on British intelligence in July 1944, was another Polish
product. Lehi under Shamir organized the assassination of Lord Moyne
that November, on the rationale that the British minister of state had
opposed a Jewish state and stopped the immigration of Jews to Palestine.
The techniques learned from Polish military intelligence were used by
Irgun in the bombing of the King David Hotel in July 1946.
—
During the Second World War the Polish state existed only in the echoes
of its former policies and in its flight from its own territories. The efforts
made by Polish diplomats and intelligence officers in the late 1930s to
create the conditions for a State of Israel did bear fruit, but only after the
war. Though some of these pro-Zionist Poles, such as Hulanicki,
remained active in Europe or Palestine, the Polish government itself had
to flee the European continent. It evacuated Warsaw with what was seen
as scandalous haste in September 1939, and made its way to Paris
through Romania. After the German invasion of France, it moved again
to London. There Polish ministers found themselves in a curious
position. The British had entered the war on their behalf, to protect the
sovereignty and borders of Poland. That objective had not been met.
Poland was Britain’s only ally between the fall of France in June 1940 and
the entrance of the Soviet Union into the war a year later. But after the
Soviet Union and then the United States entered the war in 1941, the
Polish connection counted for much less.
Poland remained a formally sovereign state thanks to the legal

continuity of its government-in-exile. The Germans did not recognize this
government, since it claimed to represent a state that the Germans
maintained had not existed. Neither did the Soviets, except for a period in
the middle of the war, between the German invasion of the Soviet Union
in 1941 and the visible turn of the tide of war in 1943.
The London exile government exercised formal command over the
underground state in Poland and its armed forces. The Polish armed
resistance, best known as the Home Army, was a vast umbrella
organization that included dozens of fighting groups from the center right
to the center left of the political spectrum. In principle, its chain of
command was subordinate to civilian control in London. In fact, the
connections with the people who ran the military and civilian
organizations in Poland were slow and irregular, dependent upon
couriers making long and dangerous journeys across occupied Europe.
For the most part, Polish sovereignty in London meant the ability of
Polish authorities to communicate with their British allies. But even such
a highly constrained form of sovereignty did have some significance for
Polish Jews.
The Polish government in London, unlike the Polish prewar
government, comprised all of the major political parties, including the
antisemitic National Democrats. It was facing a German occupation of
Poland that was bloody beyond the imaginations of British politicians
and public opinion. It was also confronted with a domestic Polish
population who had been taught to expect, under the previous Polish
regime, that one day most Jews might leave Poland. The arrival of the
Germans in half of Poland in 1939 had led to the disappearance of Jews
in most of the places they had lived for hundreds of years: as they were
concentrated in ghettos in 1940 and 1941, and then as they were
murdered in gas chambers in 1942. Poles from the eastern half of Poland,
invaded by the Soviets in 1939 and reinvaded by the Germans in 1941,
had seen the Jews there murdered in the open air in and after 1941; some
of them propagated the version of events that the Nazis also preferred:
that the Jews had earned their fate as Soviet collaborators. This was a
convenient fiction, but it was often believed by Poles in western and
central Poland. As the commander of the Polish underground wrote to
the Polish prime minister in London, the “crushing majority” of the
Polish population under German occupation was antisemitic. The Polish

government in London, which did have direct sources of information on
the mass shooting and then the mass gassing of Jews, sometimes blurred
this information into general reports of German terror against Polish
citizens.
All the same, Polish authorities did convey accurate information about
the mass murder of Jews to their British and American allies and to the
wider public in 1942. The Polish prime minister, Władysław Sikorski, was
quite unambiguous about the significance of the clearing of the Warsaw
ghetto that summer: “This mass murder has no precedent in the history
of the world; all known cruelty pales in comparison.” Polish information
undergirded Allied press briefings and reports in the British press and on
the BBC. Poles and Polish Jews alike believed that the Germans would
stop murdering Jews when their actions were made known to the world;
in this sense the Polish government did take the action that it believed
would halt the killings. Warnings did have some effect on Germany’s
allies, but not on Germany itself.
On November 27, 1942, the Polish National Committee, a kind of ersatz
parliament supporting the government abroad, demanded that the Allies
intervene to stop the killing of Jews. On December 4, the Times of
London reported that Germany planned a “complete extermination” of
Jews under its control. On December 10, the Polish foreign ministry
added its own pleas to the Allies to act. In unmistakable language, the
Polish government demanded immediate action to prevent the Germans
from completing their project of “mass extermination.” This statement
led to a firestorm in the British press and in the House of Commons,
whose members stood for a moment of silence in recognition of the
deliberate murder of millions of European Jews. In this way, Poles
contributed to the declaration issued by the British and their American
and Soviet Allies on December 17, 1942, demanding that the Germans
and their partners cease killing Jews.
This warning, issued not long before the German defeat at Stalingrad,
was no doubt understood by Germany’s allies as providing the way to
signal that their own loyalty to Berlin was conditional. It helps to explain
why Slovakia, Romania, and France all changed their policy towards Jews
quite significantly in 1943, and why Sweden began to demonstrate its
willingness to help Jews. In this way, even limited Polish sovereignty—the
ability of Polish authorities to convey credible information to their British

and other Allied counterparts—was significant to the Jews.
—
The availability of plausible firsthand information about the mass murder
of Polish Jews depended upon the courage of extraordinary individuals,
who tended to be rather close to the state in both its prewar and wartime
incarnations. One of these was Jan Kozielewski, known as Jan Karski, the
only man in the history of the Holocaust with direct access to both the
lowest of the horrors and the highest of the powers. Karski was twentyfive years old when the war began, but was already well informed about
the Jewish question in Poland. As a talented young diplomat he worked
first in the emigration section of the Polish foreign ministry, the unit
charged with finding ways to reduce the number of Jews in Poland. From
May through August 1939, he worked as the personal secretary for
Drymmer, the man in charge of the support for Betar and Irgun, and this
at the most intense time of Polish-Zionist contacts. Karski was
Drymmer’s secretary when Britain publicized its policy of restricting
Jewish immigration to Palestine and Irgun began its actions against the
British, and when Polish weapons were loaded onto ships bound for
Palestine.
In August 1939, Karski was mobilized to the Polish military base at
Oświęcim. He fled with his unit eastward, where he was taken prisoner by
the Red Army. He escaped execution as a Polish officer by pretending to
be an enlisted man and then jumping from a train. He found his way back
to Warsaw, where he saw his brother, the commander of the Warsaw
police. His brother faced the dilemma of all police officers at a moment of
foreign occupation: collaborate and risk serving the interests of a foreign
power, or refuse to collaborate and risk chaos and lawlessness. In order
to try to resolve this question for his brother, Karski traveled as a courier
to seek the Polish government-in-exile, at the time in France.
Upon his return to Poland, Karski began to attend with pained interest
to the fate of the Jews. He seems to have felt quite keenly the connection
between the National Democrats’ desire for a Poland without Jews, the
policy of the prewar Polish government to promote emigration, and the
Nazi elimination of Jews from Polish life. Although the means the
Germans used were alien to Polish politicians, the result corresponded to

a vision that had been widespread in Poland after 1935: a country without
90 percent of its Jews. The imaginary social revolution of the second half
of the 1930s, the fantasy of taking all of those Jewish homes and
businesses, was actually fulfilled in the early 1940s. German rule broke
the previous Polish social order by punishing the elites and killing the
Jews, largely destroying the prewar middle and upper classes. Karski
wrote to the Polish government that the transfer of property had created
a “narrow bridge” between the Polish population and its German masters.
The attitude of Poles to Jews he described as “generally severe, and often
ruthless.”
Most of the Jews of Warsaw were deported to the death facility of
Treblinka and murdered in the Grosse Aktion of July–September 1942.
In October, Karski entered the Warsaw ghetto, led by a Bundist through a
tunnel dug by Revisionist Zionists, the group that had been the clients of
Karski’s superiors in the foreign ministry. Some of the people he met on
the other side, members of Betar, had been part of Karski’s brief three
years before, when he had been Drymmer’s secretary and presumably
handling the paperwork on the planned emigration of Jews from Poland.
Now the men of Betar were planning to fight the Germans (although
some of them were still serving, in Warsaw as around the country, in the
Jewish police that had just completed the deportations). Leaving the
tunnel, Karski entered the building where, a few months later, the
Revisionists would raise, following their own tradition, both the Zionist
and the Polish flags as they rose against the Germans in the ghetto.
Karski was told exactly what had happened to Warsaw Jews. His contacts
asked him to help by pleading with the western Allies for action and
revenge.
In October 1942, Karski reached London—no simple undertaking for a
Polish courier in occupied Europe in the middle of the war. He brought
with him his own observations and experiences as well as three written
reports on the murder of Jews in Poland. In London, he spoke to Polish
authorities and to British intellectuals and public figures: Gerald Berry,
Victor Gollancz, Ronald Hyde, Allen Lane, Kingsley Martin. One aspect of
his message was a simple repetition of prewar Polish foreign policy: that
Polish Jews should be allowed to go to Palestine. In strong contrast to the
interwar years, this plea expressed the desperate hope of the Jews
themselves, who were facing a German policy of total murder. But

London was far from the Warsaw ghetto, a different world. Karski was
told in no uncertain terms that Jewish immigration to Palestine would
not be allowed. Thus British policy, like Polish policy, remained in a sense
unchanged from 1939. Karski also spoke to the American ambassador,
who told him that quotas allowing Jewish immigration to the United
States were unlikely to be increased. In fact, the number of Jews admitted
would actually decrease. Between July 1942 and June 1943, only 4,705
Jews were admitted to the United States—fewer than the number of
Warsaw Jews who were killed on a given day at Treblinka in summer
1942.
In all of his discussions, as in his memoir of 1944, Karski was unusual
in drawing a clear line between the German policy of social decapitation
and mass terror towards Poles, and the German policy of the total
extermination of Jews. His efforts contributed to the Polish information
campaign that preceded the Allied warning of December 1942. Karski
himself believed that he had failed, but the observations he made and the
risks he took contributed to actions that had the effect of allowing Jews to
live.
Rescue was usually grey.
—
By the time of the warning of December 1942, most Baltic, Soviet, and
Polish Jews under German occupation had already been murdered. The
shooting of Jews in the occupied Soviet Union that began the previous
year had continued throughout the spring and summer of 1942;
Operation Reinhard, the gassing of the Jews of the General Government
at Bełżec, Sobibór, and Treblinka, was complete that fall. As the Red
Army pressed forward after its victory at Stalingrad in February 1943, it
was overrunning the death pits (and in some cases finding them). Before
long, Soviet soldiers would reach the killing facilities in the east of
occupied Poland. Under this pressure, the center of Germany’s
murderous campaign would shift west to Auschwitz.
The concentration camp Auschwitz was established in 1940 on the site
of the Polish military base at Oświęcim, the very place where Karski had
reported for duty as a Polish officer in September 1939. In summer 1940,
Polish males, often politically active, began disappearing from the streets

of Warsaw, dispatched to Auschwitz. Another member of the Polish
underground volunteered to learn the truth about this mysterious place.
As the Germans were raiding Warsaw neighborhoods regarded as elite
and intellectual, Witold Pilecki walked into a roundup. Pilecki was a
farmer, local activist, and reserve officer with combat experience in the
Polish-Bolshevik War. He had been a member of the Polish Military
Organization. Though now a married man with children, he volunteered
for Auschwitz. He was dispatched on the second Warsaw transport of
1,705 men, among people who would be registered at the camp under the
numbers 3821-4959 and 4961-5526. He described his own entry into the
camp as the moment when he “finished with everything that had been on
earth and began something that was beyond it.” Pilecki remained in
Auschwitz for almost three years, seeking to organize an underground
within the camp and smuggling out notes. He escaped in 1943, and two
years later wrote a long, detailed report of life at Auschwitz. He described
the punishment and murder of Poles in 1940 and 1941, the imprisonment
and gassing of Soviet prisoners of war in 1941 and 1942, and finally the
transformation of the camp into a major killing facility for Jews.
Pilecki was a patriot, who believed that Auschwitz was simply one more
test of Polish character, a test that some people failed and some people
passed. Pilecki’s major preoccupation was the possibility of Polish
resistance, within the camp and without. Indeed, once he had escaped he
immediately rejoined the Polish underground, and fought in 1944 in the
ranks of the Home Army in the Warsaw Uprising. Nevertheless, Pilecki
had no difficulty seeing and recording the distinct horror of German
policy towards the Jews. At the time the gassings of Jews began, Pilecki
had a labor assignment that allowed him to walk from the barracks to a
tannery. He wrote of the murdered Jews from this perspective: “Over a
thousand a day from the new transports were gassed. Their corpses were
burned in the new crematoria.” And then of everyone else: “As we
marched to the tannery, raising dust from the gray path, we could see the
beautiful sunrise, pinkening the lovely flowers in the orchards and the
trees by the path. On the way back we saw young couples taking a stroll,
inhaling the charm of spring, or women peacefully pushing their children
in strollers. And then arose a thought that would stay in the mind, knock
against the inside of the skull, disappearing perhaps for a moment, but
then again stubbornly seeking an exit or an answer to the question: ‘Are

we all people?’ The ones walking through the flowers and the ones going
to the gas chambers? The ones marching beside us with rifles and we who
have been prisoners for years?”
Karski and Pilecki were men whose primary loyalty was to a Polish
state, or to the traditions that they associated with a Polish state, open to
redefinition after its destruction and fragmentation. They always claimed
that what they did was entirely uninteresting, a matter of duty, nothing
more than anyone would or at least should have done in their place. They
were curiously unaffected by the absence of actual state institutions,
internalizing the obligations arising from membership in a polity while
constantly reconsidering for themselves just what those obligations
meant—always in the direction of demanding more rather than less of
themselves. Their entire posture makes no sense without Polish
statehood, but their actions went far beyond what anyone but they
themselves expected.
A third outstanding member of the Polish underground, Władysław
Bartoszewski, would later make the point, repeatedly and with some
irritation, that individuals who worked on behalf of Jews did not first ask
the Polish nation for permission to do so. As it happened, the young
Catholic activist Bartoszewski was on the same transport to Auschwitz as
Pilecki and 1,703 other Polish men on September 22, 1940. While Pilecki
remained at Auschwitz to organize and to report, Bartoszewski was
released in April 1941 (as some people were) and returned immediately to
the Polish underground in Warsaw. Among many other commitments, he
became active in Żegota, an umbrella group of organizations in Warsaw
and other cities that worked to rescue Jews.
Some 28,000 Jews were hiding in Warsaw on the Aryan side, beyond
the ghetto; of these, some 11,600 survived. Of the 28,000, some 4,000
received help in the form of money, food, shelter, and emotional support
from members of Żegota. Most of the money came from the Joint, an
American Jewish nongovernmental organization, but was delivered in the
money belts of Polish paratroopers dropped from British planes. Żegota
was a Polish government organization, and as such represented the first
state policy (and one of very few) designed to keep Jews alive. Once the
money was delivered, which was no minor undertaking, everything
depended upon the people of Żegota.

Among Żegota’s leaders in Warsaw there was a certain dominance of
members of the Polish Socialist Party. It had been the largest party in
Warsaw before the war, counting many Jewish members and voters, and
had opposed the prewar regime and its policy of Jewish emigration. A
good deal of rescue involved socialists helping fellow party members
whom they had known before the war. In general, Żegota’s leaders had
experienced German oppression. Its director, Julian Grobelny, was
arrested by the Germans and then spent much of the war in hospital.
Irena Sendlerowa, who along with other women rescued a large number
of Jewish children, had been imprisoned by the Gestapo. Bartoszewski
and Tadeusz Rek had both been in Auschwitz; Adolf Berman had escaped
the Warsaw ghetto.
At the same time, a number of people active in Żegota were also from
the antisemitic Right. The most outspoken of these was Zofia Kossak. She
was the founder of the civil organization that preceded Żegota, and her
significance as a rescuer is indisputable. She was concerned for the souls
of Catholics who could stand by and do nothing while mass murder took
place before their eyes. She was also worried that after the war Jews
would blame the killing on the Poles. Antisemitic rescue was not as
contradictory as it might appear. Almost no one rescued Jews from a
sense of obligation to Jews; a few people rescued Jews out of a sense of
obligation to fellow human beings. The antisemitic rescuers tended to
dislike Jews and want them out of Poland, but nonetheless regarded
them as human and capable of suffering. In some cases, antisemites who
rescued Jews thought of themselves as protecting Polish sovereignty by
resisting German policy; in other cases they were acting from a sense of
charity.
The most effective rescuers were, and had to be, people who had good
contacts with assimilated Jews, who, in their turn, had further contacts
with other Jews. Such people were not antisemites. A good example was a
leading Żegota activist in Warsaw, the well-connected Maurycy HerlingGrudziński. An impressive figure, he was widely known in Warsaw
among Poles and Jews alike as an outstanding lawyer before the war.
Using money from the Polish government-in-exile, he was able to aid
more than three hundred Jews on an estate beyond Warsaw. The first
people he rescued were his professional peers, jurists, and intellectuals.
Then came Jews who were more socially distant.

Like Pilecki, Karski, and Bartoszewski, Herling-Grudziński was a
member of the Home Army, the military arm of the Polish underground.
He fought in its ranks in the Warsaw Uprising of 1944, where he was
wounded in battle. Like Pilecki (from eastern Poland), Karski (arrested by
the Soviets in 1939), and Bartoszewski (who would later spend years in a
Stalinist prison), Herling-Grudziński also felt the effects of Soviet power.
Gustaw Herling-Grudziński, the chronicler of the Gulag, was Maurycy’s
brother. While Maurycy was hiding Jews in Warsaw, Gustaw was felling
trees in a camp in the Soviet far north.
After the war was over, Maurycy would become a leading jurist, while
Gustaw would become an admired writer. Neither of the two Polish
brothers would make much of a fact that might have been crucial to their
fates: They were Jewish.
All rescue involved self-rescue.

11
Partisans of God and Man

A nszel Sznajder and his brother jumped from a train evacuating them
from Auschwitz in January 1945. The two of them spoke both Polish and
Russian, and intimidated the locals by suggesting that they were fighting
in the ranks of the Polish Home Army or with the Soviet partisans.
Depending upon their initial impressions of the people they met, the
brothers decided which story to use. The essential part of the story, the
part that had to be believed, was that they had comrades who would
protect or avenge them, “a force backing us up.” They needed to be seen
not as two isolated Jews who could be killed, but as fearsome men who
were part of something larger: an army or a state.
The Sznajder brothers were among the few Jews who made the threat
of violence work for them. Sometimes Jews survived because they joined
the forces that resisted the Germans, or pretended to have done so. More
often, however, the Jews who were trying to take shelter from German
killing policies were exposed to greater risks by open opposition to
German rule. When French communists began to resist, the first victims
of German retaliations were Polish Jews in Paris. In Serbia, the partisan
resistance was used by German occupation authorities as the prompt to
exterminate Serbian Jews. In the Netherlands, where there were many
rescuers and many resisters, the two groups got in each other’s way.
Where the German police sought the Dutch resistance, they tended to
find Dutch Jews. In Slovakia, a national uprising led to a German
intervention and to the murder of thousands of Jews who would
otherwise most likely have survived.
This bloody irony was also apparent in Poland and the western Soviet
Union, where more Jews were in hiding, where German rule was more

violent, and where resistance was widespread. The Warsaw Uprising of
August 1944 was the most significant urban rebellion against German
rule. Although it was organized and fought in the main by the Polish
Home Army, it was, perhaps, the largest single effort of Jewish armed
resistance. In all likelihood, more Jews fought in the Warsaw Uprising of
1944 than in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of 1943 (and some fought in
both). The Home Army was not technically a partisan army: Its members
wore uniforms or insignia to distinguish themselves from civilians, and
they were subordinate to the Polish government-in-exile in London. The
official German position was that the Polish state had never existed, and
German forces applied their main anti-partisan tactic by shooting
civilians—at the very least 120,000 of them—in Warsaw. The defeat of the
Warsaw Uprising meant the physical destruction of the entirety of
Warsaw, building by building, just as the ghetto had been destroyed the
previous year. Up until that point the survival chances of a Jew in hiding
in Warsaw were about the same as that of a Jew in hiding in Amsterdam.
When Warsaw was removed from the face of the earth its Jews had no
place left to hide.
The Soviet partisans were the most significant irregular force fighting
the Germans in the countryside of eastern Europe. They did not
distinguish themselves from civilians. Instead, they mixed among them,
knowingly bringing German reprisals upon villages, counting on this as a
means of recruitment. In the hinterland behind the German advance,
chiefly in northwestern Ukraine and Belarus, Soviet partisans had to
compete with the Germans for the loyalty of the villages, which meant, in
practice, for their food. If villagers gave food to the Soviet partisans, then
the Germans killed everyone in that village, including any Jews in hiding,
often by immolation in a barn. If villagers gave food to the Germans, they
risked violence at the hands of the Soviet partisans. The nature of
partisan warfare was fatal for Jews who were attempting to hide.
—
The fact that the Sznajder brothers so casually claimed to be with the
Poles one moment and with the Soviets at another defies the logic of the
postwar polemics. The great quarrel today is not between defenders of
Nazis and defenders of the resistance. It is, rather, between the defenders

of the two major groups who resisted the Germans behind the eastern
front: the Polish Home Army and the Soviet partisans. Both of these
groups were fighting the Germans, but both were also aspiring to control
the same east European lands after the war—lands that were also the
world homeland of the Jews. The German eastern empire overlapped
with the territory of historic Jewish settlement, which overlapped with
the interwar Polish state, which overlapped with the security zone that
Stalin wished to establish between Moscow and Berlin after the war.
The Jewish question, in later polemics, became a tool in an argument
about the right to rule: the Polish claim to national independence against
the Soviet claim to revolutionary hegemony. Defenders of the Polish
resistance claim that Soviet partisans could have liberated no one, since
they were servants of advancing totalitarian repression. Defenders of
Moscow maintain that the Home Army was fascist, since it was not an
ally of the Soviet Union. In fact, on the Jewish question, the two groups
were rather similar, since their similar form as quasi-state organizations
was more important than their different ideologies.
Some distinguished soldiers and officers of the Home Army opposed
both the German occupation of their country and the German policy of
murdering all Polish Jews. Maurycy Herling-Grudziński, Władysław
Bartoszewski, Jan Karski, and Witold Pilecki all served in the Home
Army. It was not at all uncommon for people who sheltered Home Army
soldiers to also shelter Jews. Henryk Józewski, the interwar governor of
Volhynia who had supported both the Promethean project in Soviet
Ukraine and Revisionist Zionism, spent the war in the Polish
underground. One of his many hiding places was in Podkowa, west of
Warsaw, with the Niemyski family, whose main project was rescuing
Jews. Northeast of Warsaw, in Ostrów Mazowiecka, Jadwiga
Długoborska hid both local Home Army officers and Jews until she was
executed by the Gestapo. Jerzy Koźmiński, like Karski and Pilecki a Home
Army member who was dispatched to Auschwitz, chose not to correspond
with his family when offered the chance. He did not want to endanger the
Jews who were hiding in his house by revealing his home address. Michał
Gieruła was another Home Army soldier who was hiding Jews. When he
was denounced, some of the Jews he was sheltering were killed in his
home. He and his wife were tortured by the Germans, but did not reveal
the hiding place of the remaining Jews. They were then executed by

hanging. As one of those Jewish survivors later put it, the Gierułas
“sacrificed their lives in exchange for ours.”
The Home Army also carried out some actions to save Jewish lives, or
support Jewish struggles. Probably the most significant way the Home
Army and other Polish political organizations aided individual Jews was
by the production of false German documents. Their famous “paper
mills” could generate German Kennkarten, indicating that Jews were, in
fact, Poles: “Aryan papers,” as Jews called them at the time. Usually Poles
took money or goods for this, but not always. The Home Army had a
Jewish section, led by Henryk Woliński, which supplied information to
foreign media beginning in early 1942. The official press organ of the
Home Army, the Information Bulletin, reported on the Holocaust at
every stage. The paratroopers who were dropped in British planes over
Warsaw, their money belts stuffed with cash to help Żegota rescue Jews,
were soldiers of the Home Army.
Thousands of Jews either joined the Home Army or claimed to have
joined the Home Army as an explanation for their underground
existence. In general, such a strategy could work only for the minority of
Jews who could pass as Poles; others would almost certainly be
denounced. The Warsaw region of the Home Army supplied the Jewish
fighters of the ghetto with the weapons that they used to establish their
authority and then more weapons that they used in the Ghetto Uprising
of April 1943. In a few minor cases, small detachments of Jews were
allowed to associate themselves with the Home Army. The Jews who
fought in the Warsaw Uprising in August 1944 were not so much joining
the Home Army (although some had done so) as joining in a battle that
they saw as for their own freedom. As one of them described the thinking:
“A Jewish perspective ruled out passivity. Poles took up arms against the
mortal enemy. Our obligation as victims and as fellow citizens was to help
them.”
In the opening days of the Warsaw Uprising, on August 5, 1944, one
Home Army detachment liberated KZ Warschau (Concentration Camp
Warsaw), which had been a major site of the murder of Jews and Poles.
Most of its prisoners were foreign Jews, Greeks who had been
transported from Auschwitz because they were deemed capable of heavy
labor. Because this Home Army operation was entirely symbolic and
without strategic significance, it was carried out entirely by volunteers.

One of them was Staszek Aronson, a Jew who had jumped the train to
Treblinka and had returned to Warsaw to fight in the Home Army. Many
of the Jews liberated from the camp joined the uprising. But some of
them were shot, still wearing their camp uniforms, by members of a
smaller Polish underground group, the right-wing National Armed Forces
(Narodowe Siły Zbrojne, NSZ).
The Home Army was a continuation of the prewar Polish army and a
legally constituted organ of the Polish government-in-exile abroad. As
such it was open to all Polish citizens. But unlike the prewar Polish army,
which was integrated in fact as well as in principle, the Home Army was
seen to be an organization of ethnic Poles. The war and the deliberate
German and Soviet extermination of the Polish political nation tended to
push Poles towards an ethnic understanding of armed struggle. The
Judeobolshevik myth provided the moral cover for robbery and murder
of Jews by units of the Home Army, which certainly took place. In 1943,
as the surviving Jews of Poland were in hiding, the Home Army was
instructed to treat armed Jews as bandits. Sometimes this meant that the
Home Army executed them, but sometimes it did not. At the very same
time, the Home Army issued death sentences upon Poles who were
blackmailing Jews and carried out a few. The National Armed Forces
(which Jewish survivors, understandably, often confuse with the Home
Army) simply took it for granted that Jews were among the foes of the
nation. Although the National Armed Forces were much smaller than the
Home Army, they probably killed more Jews.
The myth of Judeobolshevism could also be murderous for the Poles
who were trying to help Jews. In June 1944, Ludwik Widerszal and Jerzy
Makowiecki, two members of the Home Army high command who had
been most responsible for aiding Jews, were murdered by their own
colleagues, apparently after a denunciation that they were working for the
Soviet Union. The deed was arranged by Witold Bieńkowski, himself an
antisemitic rescuer of Jews. Such incidents were possible in the political
environment of occupied Poland towards the end of the war, where
patriotic resistance against German occupation gave way to fear of a
return of communism. The same Red Army that was now advancing as a
liberator from German rule had occupied Polish territory not long before
as an ally of Germany. Polish Home Army soldiers were certainly correct
that people in Poland would collaborate with Soviet power and right to

fear that the Soviet Union could dominate Poland after the war. It was the
identification of communists as Jews and Jews (and their supporters) as
communists that was the lethal error.

—
Although communism had been illegal in Poland before the war, and the
interwar Polish communist party had been tiny, communism did provide
some Polish citizens a compelling alternative to national identity. Very
often, people who were communists by conviction (as opposed to
apparatchiks of a communist regime) did help Jews after the German
invasion. People who were accustomed to persecution for their beliefs
tended to be more generous to others who suffered during the war.
In villages where communism (or its front organizations) had been
popular before the war, pogroms against Jews in 1941 were less likely.
Communist party membership before the war always involved
meaningful social contacts between Jews and non-Jews, and always
required experience in life underground. Communism also meant, for
non-Jews, a worldview that competed with the everyday antisemitic
discourse of the National Democrats and the Polish Right generally in the
1930s. One Polish citizen, a nurse who worked in a hospital in Białystok
before the war, befriended Jewish doctors. Like a considerable number of
her fellow Belarusians who lived in Poland in the 1930s, she was
sympathetic to communism and disgusted by what she remembered as
“ubiquitous antisemitism.”
Though communist ideology was friendlier to Jews than most varieties
of patriotism, the wartime circumstances of actual recruitment to the
Soviet partisans were difficult for Jews. In the places where the Soviets
had ruled in 1939 and 1940, in the doubly occupied territories and in the
prewar Soviet Union, the Germans carried out the Holocaust by shooting
in 1941 and 1942, delegating the task when they could to Soviet citizens.
This meant that in the occupied Soviet Union, the number of local young
men who took direct part in the murder of Jews was high, far higher than
in occupied Poland to the west. To the Soviet partisans, however, the
members of the auxiliary police forces were a precious resource, to be
brought over if at all possible to their own side. The result was that the
Soviet partisans, behind the German lines, were fighting amidst the
killing fields and recruiting the killers, sometimes by promising them
amnesty. Anton Bryns’kyi, a Soviet partisan commander so friendly to
Jews that he was rumored to be Jewish, recruited from the German police

apparatus. Indeed, in late 1942, Ukrainian nationalists were quite
concerned that young Ukrainian auxiliary policemen, whom they
regarded as their future cadres, were instead leaving to fight for the
Soviets. One Ukrainian policeman, in a dramatic example of this trend,
saved his Jewish girlfriend from the death pits by switching sides just
before she was to be shot and taking her with him to join the Soviet
partisans.
Jews who knew the local terrain deliberately recruited the murderers of
their fellow Jews to the Soviet partisans. Izrael Pińczuk was a young
Jewish man from a tiny village called Gliny, near Rokitno, in Volhynia.
When the killing began, Pińczuk did not want to be separated from his
mother. Like many Jewish fathers, brothers, and sons, his first thoughts
during the mass murder were of his family. His mother told him to save
himself so that he could say kaddish for her. At first he disobeyed and
followed the rest of the community towards death. But then the men were
separated from the women at a transit camp in Sarny, and he never saw
his mother again. Having listened to rabbis prophesy the return of the
messiah and proclaim the need to accept death with dignity, Pińczuk ran
and made his way to local peasants whom he knew and trusted. Then he
joined the Soviet partisans, and turned his deep local knowledge to their
purposes. “I have a whole staff of local people recruited by me,” he said,
“among the local people, Ukrainians, who went over to the service of the
Germans, and now come over to our side. Although this is an element
that served the Germans and even robbed and killed Jews, it is much
better to have them as our collaborators rather than as enemies favoring
and serving the Germans.”
Not every local Jew working for the returning Soviet regime was so
explicit about this question, but the experience was a general one. Such
side switching was necessary for the existence of the Soviet partisans,
who were often double or even triple collaborators. The result was a
curious mixture, in the ranks of the Soviet partisans, between Jews who
were seeking to save themselves from the Germans and murderers of
Jews who were seeking to save themselves from Soviet revenge for their
collaboration with the Germans. Some of the Soviet commanders from
prewar Soviet territory were themselves antisemites, who found in the
partisans an opportunity to express and act according to views that were
illegal in the Soviet Union itself. Jews seeking to join the Soviet partisans

had to deal with, in various measures, the kinds of people they had been
seeking to escape. Many Jews who tried to join the Soviet partisans
without weapons were murdered instead. Some who tried to join were
first robbed of their weapons and then killed.
Nevertheless, the Soviet partisans were, for most Jews, the closest
thing to a friendly army and the best opportunity for self-rescue by taking
sides. The commanders of the Soviet partisans who were friendly to Jews
and saved their lives were people from both sides of the Polish-Soviet
border and of various nationalities. Perhaps the most warmly
remembered of them was “Max,” who served under Anton Bryns’kyi in
northwestern Ukraine, in Volhynia. Max was rumored to be many things
but was, in fact, a Pole named Józef Sobiesiak. He was one of the few, and
perhaps the only, partisan commander who sought out contacts within
ghettos in the hopes of rescuing Jews. On one occasion he ordered a
punitive expedition against a pair of Ukrainians who had raped and
turned in two Jewish girls who had been in hiding. The two Ukrainians
were shot, their houses were burned down, and warnings were left for
their neighbors. The partisan who led this punitive exhibition was himself
a Ukrainian.
A substantial number of the Jewish men who joined the Soviet
partisans and fought with vigor were from Volhynia. Like Belarus to the
north, Volhynia was a terrain well suited to partisan warfare. As the
Germans undertook to complete the liquidation of ghettos in Volhynia in
autumn 1942, Soviet partisans were already known to be in the vicinity.
In comparison to Belarus, its people were highly politicized, in all
possible directions: Ukrainian, Polish, Jewish, communist, and
nationalist. The much-loved Polish Soviet partisan commander Max was
active in this region. A certain level of Jewish initiative resounded in the
Jewish voices of wartime Volhynia. Many of the Jews who joined the
Soviet partisans in Volhynia had already fled to the marshes before the
Soviets arrived. Some of them had formed family camps, where women
and children were sheltered and fed. Jewish men from Volhynia were
articulate about their motives: “the magnificent feeling of the deed, of the
struggle for victory.” Or: “I am glad that I took some revenge. With every
German I killed I felt better.”
In the late 1930s, the Polish army had trained young Jewish men in the
use of firearms in the Volhynia region, where Betar and Revisionist

Zionism were popular. The Jews fighting in the swamps of Volhynia, like
Jews of this part of Europe generally, lived not only in the midst of a
German project to kill them all but among rival ideas of what their
political future should hold: Israel, Poland, the Soviet Union. All of these
Jews, so long as they lived, were touched not only by the campaign to kill
them but also by all three of these visions of political life. Max
remembered the names of the three family camps established by Jews:
“Birobidzhan,” the name of the Soviet autonomous zone for Jews;
“Nalewki,” the major Jewish neighborhood in Warsaw; and “Palestine,”
the Mediterranean land that members of Betar had promised to
themselves.
In 1943 and 1944, some Jews were fighting alongside the Soviets
against the Germans in the marshes of what had been remote Polish
borderlands; others, sometimes their neighbors, had been deported to the
Gulag, then had made their way with a Polish army through India and
Iran to Palestine, where they would fight the British in the deserts of what
would become the State of Israel.
—
Both the Soviet Union and Poland claimed the territories where Jews
lived and died, and the Soviets were intent on overwhelming not just the
Germans but any forces that supported Polish independence. All
organized attempts to rescue Jews had to become politicized, since from a
Soviet perspective any organization, regardless of purpose, was either
pro-Soviet or anti-Soviet. In the Stalinist understanding of reality, there
was no society as such and no space for independent action. Anything
that took place had to be seen not as an element of a complicated reality
but as a reflection of the basic conflict between the proletariat and its
global capitalist oppressors—which meant, in practice, the Soviet
leadership and those it deemed hostile at a given moment. People who
rescued Jews on a large scale, regardless of their own personal
sentiments, were inevitably classified one way or the other. Those who
lived under Soviet rule usually understood all of this.
One such person was Tuvia Bielski, a shopkeeper and miller’s son from
prewar Poland’s major stretch of forests and swamps in the northeast, in
what is today western Belarus. Bielski was a Polish citizen who had

performed military service in the Polish army between 1927 and 1929. He
first experienced Soviet rule during the German-Soviet invasion of 1939,
when eastern Poland was annexed to the Soviet Union. Bielski moved
then to the city of Lida and worked for the Soviet trade apparatus. After
the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, Bielski tried to
defend Jews from mass murder. He and his brothers established a family
camp in the Naliboki Forest in early 1942. Like other family camps, this
was a Jewish initiative; but, as elsewhere, the leaders had to come to an
arrangement with the Soviet partisans. Bielski convinced local Soviet
partisans that he was one of theirs, and in late 1942 he and the men who
protected the family camp were formally subordinated to Soviet
command. The price of this was that Bielski and his men took part in
Soviet operations against the Polish Home Army.
The Soviet Union had invaded eastern Poland in 1939 as an ally of
Germany and arrived in eastern Poland again in 1944 as an enemy of
Germany. Stalin explained to his British and American allies that the
Soviet Union would treat the lands gained by alliance with the Germans
as if they had always been Soviet. The Soviet forces that arrived in these
lands, now for a second time, had amnesia among their ammunition. The
previous Soviet invasion of Poland and the associated destruction of the
Polish state in 1939 were to be completely forgotten. The arrival of Soviet
forces in prewar Polish territory in 1944 was to be a liberation from
fascism, nothing less and nothing more.
This powerful myth could admit no objection. Moscow’s actual
responsibility for inviting the Nazis into eastern Europe was to be purged
from Soviet history, distributed instead among the enemies of the
moment, people deemed to be potential opponents of Soviet power. Since
the populations that fell under Soviet rule in eastern Poland had been
Polish citizens before 1939 and had therefore experienced a Soviet
occupation between 1939 and 1941, everyone was in some sense suspect,
because their lives contradicted the political line. Bielski himself was a
Zionist who named his family camp “Jerusalem.” Zionism was a risky
allegiance, and one that he would not have mentioned to his Soviet
comrades. Fighting on the same side as the Soviets, against the Germans,
was not enough to be on the right side of the story. The fact that Bielski
was willing to use his men in actions against Polish forces, whatever he
personally thought about it, was likely a necessary demonstration of his

loyalty. Bielski had played chess with the local commander of the Home
Army. His actions were no doubt dictated by his correct understanding of
what the Soviets expected.
Although the Polish army, unlike the Red Army, had never engaged in
combat as a German ally, the Soviets had no trouble seeing the Poles as
fascists. In the Stalinist world of discourse, a “fascist” was not a Nazi or
someone who had helped the Nazis; a “fascist” was someone who was
deemed by the Stalinist regime not to be working in the interests of the
Soviet Union. As a general rule, the Red Army would allow the Poles to
engage in combat against the Germans, and then disarm them and give
them a choice between subordination to Soviet command or the Gulag. In
some cases, Polish soldiers, and especially Polish officers, were simply
murdered. After the Red Army had reached Berlin and defeated the
Germans in May 1945, it returned to the forests of northeastern Poland
for a separate operation against the remnants of the Home Army. After
the clearing of the Augustów Forest in June 1945, some 592 Polish men
were executed. About forty thousand Polish men were sent to the Gulag
at war’s end, seventeen thousand of them on accusations of having served
in the Home Army—which was the largest underground organization in
Europe to resist the Nazis from the beginning of the war to the end.
Between 1945 and 1949, in the four years after the war, as communists
supported by Moscow made their way to total power in Poland, Soviet
propaganda developed the postwar line that supporters of Polish
statehood, supporters of Jewish statehood, Americans, Nazis, and fascists
were all somehow essentially the same people. The United States had
remained politically present in Europe by extending the aid known as the
Marshall Plan; Israel was established as an independent state in 1948 but
did not become, as Stalin had hoped, a Soviet client; and the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) was founded in 1949 as a military
alliance to the west of Stalin’s empire. In the Soviet propaganda of the
early Cold War, the same alignment of forces that the Red Army had
defeated in 1945 were still at large in the world, ready at any moment to
attack the homeland of socialism. The actual facts of the matter—who had
fought against whom and who had collaborated with whom between 1939
and 1945—were largely irrelevant. History was not to be discovered and
understood but to be worked into a shape that was suitable for the future
of the Soviet political order. All governments do this in some measure;

the Soviet aspiration was unusual because it was total.

Polish soldiers who had spent the whole war fighting the Germans were
classified as fascists and sometimes even executed along with German
prisoners. Meanwhile, Poles who had tortured and murdered Jews during
the war joined the Polish communist party, which was reestablished
under Soviet tutelage, and became supporters of the new Soviet-backed
communist regime in Poland. Such double collaboration was politically
explicable, since people who had carried out German policy needed
protection in the new order. It was also politically necessary. Just as
people who resist one form of tyranny will tend to resist another, people
who have collaborated with one form of tyranny will tend to come to
terms with the next. Multiple collaboration was inevitable in a country
such as Poland that had first been divided between the Germans and
Soviets, then completely occupied by the Germans, and then completely
occupied by the Soviets.
Any Marxist could have explained why Soviet power in postwar Poland
could not be pro-Jewish. Poles, like everyone else in Europe under
German occupation, had taken Jewish property. Because Jews had been
so numerous in Poland, and because the share of urban property owned
by Jews had been high, this amounted to a dramatic transformation of
the whole society. It was not that all Poles were poorer than all Jews
before the war. Nor was it the case that Poles prospered during the
occupation—the scale of destruction, even in the countryside, was
something inconceivable in western Europe. What was telling for the
future was the German politics of relative deprivation: taking something
from everyone, but taking everything from the Jews, and then taking
their lives. This created the gaps—the empty apartments and commercial
and professional niches—that Poles filled with all the greater
determination given their losses during the war and their uncertainty
about what was coming next.
The Soviets entered a country devastated by war and faced a
population that was generally hostile. Rather than questioning the Nazi
social revolution in Poland, Soviet power sanctioned it. In effect, though
not by design, the Germans had carried out the first stage of the standard
two-part Soviet revolution: the transfer of property from a group deemed
to have no future to another group that then becomes beholden to
authority—preparatory to the completion of the revolution by

collectivization. Soviet and thus Polish communist propaganda denied
the special suffering of Jews and portrayed their murder as part of the
general martyrdom of peaceful Soviet or Polish citizenries. If there was
no Holocaust and therefore no ethnic specificity to German policy, then
there could not have been an ethnic transfer of property. Property
became a point of contact between the Soviet authorities and the local
population, much as it had between the German authorities and the local
population. The Germans allowed Poles to steal, and the Soviets allowed
Poles to keep what they had stolen. The consequences of the Holocaust
became part of the legitimation of Soviet rule.
Soviet-style rule in Poland as elsewhere required a monopoly on virtue
as well as control over the past. Resistance to the Soviets was by
definition pro-German and reactionary, since History had only two sides.
Any true wartime opposition to the Germans must have been organized
by the Soviets. Other forms had no right to exist, and so had to be
crushed if they still existed, presented as somehow objectively pro-Nazi
and “fascist.” The Warsaw Ghetto Uprising of 1943 was revised as
communist (and therefore not essentially Jewish) and thus acceptable;
the Warsaw Uprising of 1944 was presented as fascist and consigned to
oblivion. The Home Army was presented as a partner of the Nazis, even
though the men and women of the Polish resistance were being tortured
in Gestapo prisons while the Soviet Union was still Nazi Germany’s ally.
Poles who had rescued Jews were sometimes troublesome in the new
communist order, since they drew attention to the social basis of Soviet
rule (the far larger number of Poles who had stolen from Jews) as well as
to the hollowness of the Soviet characterization of the war (fascists
against the USSR and its peaceful citizens). Thus, individual Poles who
resisted the Germans and resisted the Soviets and drew attention to the
special Jewish plight were a hindrance to memory policy. Witold Pilecki,
who volunteered for Auschwitz and fought in the Warsaw Uprising, was
shot by the Polish communist regime as a spy. Władysław Bartoszewski,
who had been sentenced to Auschwitz by the Germans and who had
worked ably to rescue Jews in Żegota, was sentenced to prison by the
communists for his service in the Home Army. Jan Karski, who had
voluntarily entered the Warsaw ghetto and had tried to explain to
western leaders the character of the Final Solution, was in emigration
after the war, and so beyond the reach of Polish communist authorities.

Soviet propaganda slandered him as an antisemite. In Palestine, Witold
Hulanicki, the Polish diplomat who supported Jewish revolutionaries,
was murdered, most likely on Soviet instructions. The most effective
rescuer of Jews in eastern Europe, the amateur diplomat Raoul
Wallenberg, was arrested by Soviet counterintelligence and held in the
infamous Lubianka and Lefortovo prisons. He died in Soviet custody,
although to this day no one knows the details.
As the example of Wallenberg illustrates, the total need to allocate good
and evil extended beyond the Polish and Jewish questions. The Soviet
return to Europe meant the establishment of friendly, which is to say
communist, regimes in Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, and Romania,
as well as in Poland. In none of these places would the robbery of Jews be
challenged, and in none of them would the murder of Jews enter history
as a distinct subject. Nowhere would the people who risked their lives to
rescue Jews be regarded as heroes. Those who helped Jews were
portrayed as those who somehow got more money for saving them than
they did by killing them. Rescuers in eastern Europe generally tried to
conceal what they had done, so as not to arouse the interest of neighbors
who might want to search for Jewish valuables. The powerful and
enduring myth of Jewish gold and jewelry in the houses of rescuers
reflects the mindset of those many Poles and east Europeans who robbed
and killed Jews, not that of those who helped them. But since under
Stalinism no contrary moral discourse could appear, materialism was all
that remained.
—
Klimenty Sheptyts’kyi was another Polish citizen and rescuer of Jews who
was punished by the Soviets after the war. He was a Greek Catholic
churchman, an archimandrite of the Studite Order of monks,
representing a faith that in its liturgy was eastern, like the Orthodox
Churches of Ukraine and Russia, but in its institutional hierarchy was
western, in that it was one of the many smaller Catholic churches
subordinate to the Vatican. Following the instructions of his brother
Andrei, who was the metropolitan of the Greek Catholic Church,
Klimenty and other monks and priests hid more than a hundred Jews,
many of them children, in their cathedral complex, Saint Jura, in Lwów—

which they, as Ukrainians, called Lviv.
Andrei Sheptyts’kyi was the only Christian churchman of such high
rank to act decisively against the mass murder of Jews. He had initially
welcomed the German invasion as a liberation from Soviet rule, which
had targeted not only his church but an increasing number of his flock.
Without ever changing his opinion about the evil of the Soviet regime, he
quickly came to believe that Nazi occupation was worse. Aside from his
labor of rescue, which was of course secret, he protested to Himmler,
protested to Hitler, and asked the pope to intervene to protect Jews. He
told Pius XII that Jews were “the first victims” of German rule and that
National Socialism meant “hatred of everything that is honorable and
beautiful.” He issued pastoral letters reminding his flock of the divine
commandment not to murder. He also classified murder as a reserved
sin, which meant that Greek Catholics who killed human beings had to
confess personally to him. Because Andrei Sheptyts’kyi was aged and
crippled, these confessions were his way of being informed about what he
understood as a deluge of sinfulness among his people. Hearing
confession required him to face the truth, time after time, of what many
Ukrainian Christians were doing to Jews. He died in November 1944, not
long after the return of the Red Army. The Soviets forcibly subordinated
the Greek Catholic Church to the Moscow Patriarchate of the Orthodox
Church, which they had long before humiliated and tamed. When
Klimenty refused to renounce his faith, he was sentenced to prison in
Soviet Russia, where he died in 1951.
The Sheptyts’kyi brothers were no doubt unusual human beings, and
Andrei was acting from a position of some authority. As an archbishop of
the Catholic Church, he was far less vulnerable to German oppression
than the vast majority of the population and the vast majority of
churchmen. His church was also in a special position, in that its believers
had been subject to Soviet occupation in 1939–1941, when the Soviet
Union annexed eastern Poland. Many of the Ukrainian nationalists whom
the Germans induced to collaborate after 1941 were Greek Catholics.
Although many of these young men did not heed the instructions of their
metropolitan, they would have reacted negatively had the Germans
arrested or killed Sheptyts’kyi. In this sense his status was something like
that of a diplomat, and his ability to exploit the buildings of the cathedral
complex to save Jews resembled the ability of diplomats to extend state

protection.
Yet the Greek Catholic Church itself had a history of vulnerability. It
was a kind of mediator between Eastern and Western Christian traditions
in Europe. Established in 1596 as part of an attempt to restore unity
among Eastern and Western Christians, it was known for two centuries as
the Uniate Church. Its years of greatest prosperity were under the early
modern Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, which ceased to exist in 1795.
Most of the ecumenical territory of the Uniate Church then passed into
the Russian Empire, which did not recognize its existence and which
oversaw its merger with the dominant Orthodox Church. The Uniate
Church survived, however, in the Habsburg province of Galicia. The
Roman Catholic Habsburgs renamed it the “Greek Catholic Church,” to
emphasize its connection with Rome. Under Habsburg rule, the church
became associated with a Ukrainian national revival, one of whose
leaders was Andrei Sheptyts’kyi.
In 1918, the Habsburg monarchy disintegrated after its defeat in the
First World War, and Galicia, with all of its Greek Catholics, was
incorporated within the newly independent Polish state. Ukrainians were
suddenly a national minority within a nation-state rather than within a
pluralist empire. The nationally aware Ukrainians of the former
Habsburg district of Galicia, accustomed to a good deal of freedom under
Habsburg rule, were seen by Polish authorities as a particular threat.
Roman Catholic Poles did not usually regard the Greek Catholic Church
within Poland as an equally dignified part of the larger Catholic Church.
Within interwar Poland, the Greek Catholic Church was the refuge of a
Ukrainian national minority, many of whose members believed that they
were oppressed by the Polish state. The Polish state was constitutionally
secular; its policies were nevertheless influenced, especially in the second
half of the 1930s, by a large National Democratic movement that
associated itself with the Roman Catholic Church. For many Polish
nationalists, Andrei Sheptyts’kyi was the servant of an alien cause. Within
his own church, Sheptyts’kyi was known for his unusually positive
attitude towards Jews and respect for Jewish tradition. He corresponded
with rabbis in Hebrew.
In its experience of alienation from central authority, the Greek
Catholic Church resembled other churches that rescued Jews. As a
general matter, churches that enjoyed a close relationship with the state

before the war were not active in rescue. With the collapse of the previous
political order, their own capacity for action declined. Men of the cloth
who were unaccustomed to being in opposition rarely ventured forth with
interpretations of Christian teachings that might provide a basis for
resisting the new Nazi status quo. In Nazi Germany itself, the major
denominations tended to articulate a form of Christianity that was
aligned with the new order. Although there were exceptions, such as
Dietrich Bonhoeffer and the Confessing Church he helped establish,
German Protestants generally allowed their churches to be nazified.
By contrast, church leaders and Christian believers who were used to a
certain amount of tension with political authorities and with the
surrounding population tended to be more open to the possibility of
opposing German policies, and quicker to recognize a Christian mission
to aid Jews. It was not the content of Protestantism, most likely, that
made French Protestants more likely to aid Jews than French Catholics,
but rather their own minority status and history of persecution. In the
Netherlands, where Catholics were predominant in some districts and
Protestants were in others, the Catholics tended to rescue Jews where
Catholics were the minority, and Protestants tended to rescue Jews where
Protestants were the minority. Members of smaller religions, especially,
were able to trust one another in times of stress, and accustomed to
seeing their homes as embattled outposts of truth in a broken world. It
seems that the more alienated Christians were from authority before the
war, the more likely they were to rescue Jews.
In the occupied Soviet Union, fleeing Jews sometimes found shelter
with representatives of banned minor Protestant denominations. Baptists
in Ukraine, for example, rescued Jews. They believed that Jews were
children of Israel and liked to discuss the Bible and Zionism with them.
The Krupa and Zybelberg families stayed in a Baptist’s hayloft for six
weeks and grew friendly with him. They promised to invite him to
Palestine if they survived. They told him their dreams, and he interpreted
them. The Shtundists, an evangelical Protestant denomination that arose
in southern Russia and Ukraine under the influence of the Baptists and
other Protestants, also tended to be friendly to Jews in distress. Lea
Goldberg was a teenage Jewish girl from Rafałówka who, alone, escaped
the mass shooting of the Jews of her village in August 1942. She found
her way to Shtundists, who took her in. She converted. When the

Ukrainian Insurgent Army (Ukraïnsk’a Povstans’ka Armiia, UPA)
attacked the Shtundists, most likely in July 1943, they captured her and
used her as a nurse. She watched for six months as her UPA unit killed
Soviet partisans, Poles, and Jews. When she finally escaped the UPA she
made her way back to a Shtundist she knew, who hid her under the hay of
his wagon. Emanuel Ringelblum, the Jewish historian who created the
archive of the Warsaw ghetto, believed that minor Protestant
denominations behaved similarly in Poland. Protestants who rescued
Jews were not acting from the ecumenical views that have since become
more common, but rather from an interpretation of Christian belief that
operated more or less in isolation from the dominant institutions of
spiritual and secular authority.
The dominant Roman Catholic Church in Poland took no stance
against the mass murder of the millions of Jews who had lived for
centuries among its adherents. Catholic doctrine at the time deemed Jews
collectively responsible for the killing of Jesus, and Catholic teachings
about modernity connected the blight of communism to Judaism. As a
result, the motivations of Roman Catholics who rescued Jews had to arise
from some sort of individualism, either their own or that of their parish
priests. Such Roman Catholics tended to express religious beliefs that
were unorthodox or heretical.
—
Wilm Hosenfeld, a Roman Catholic Nazi German officer stationed in
Poland, came to regard the Holocaust as a kind of second original sin. He
served as the director of sports for German officers in occupied Warsaw.
For whatever reason, he saw the deportation of the Jews from the city
with clear eyes and declined to apply political or ideological
rationalizations to the sin of murder. For him, the crucial question was
simply whether or not the Jews of the ghetto were being deported to their
deaths. If so, he wrote, there “is no honor in being a German officer.”
After the destruction of the ghetto, he spoke of “a curse that can never be
lifted.” He aided several Jews and Poles, rescuing some from certain
death. He is remembered for finding and helping the pianist Władysław
Szpilman in the ruins of Warsaw during the final weeks of the German
occupation. Hosenfeld was sentenced to twenty-five years in prison as a

war criminal by the Soviets and died in captivity. Szpilman survived to
tell Hosenfeld’s story.
Aleksandra Ogrodzińska, a Polish Roman Catholic, believed in
miracles. In 1940, she and Vala Kuznetsov were colleagues in a Soviet
workplace in the middle of marshy Polesia, in what had been eastern
Poland before the Soviet invasion. After the Germans drove out the
Soviets in 1941, Aleksandra lied to the new authorities, claiming that Vala
was her domestic help. In this way she removed one Jewish woman from
public view. In the weeks and months and years that followed,
Aleksandra cried when she told Vala what was happening to the Jews.
“Why do we deserve this?” Vala asked Aleksandra. “Just because we are
Jews?” Aleksandra wept and tried to comfort Vala, and perhaps herself,
by saying that a miracle that very night could liberate them and change
everything.
Wonders and visions threaten religious institutions, because they
challenge the monopoly of inspiration of the clergy. Gedali Rydlewicz
escaped from a transport from Biała Podlaska, on the western edge of
Polesia. She found her way to a man at the edge of a forest whom the
people of the area called the “Saint.” Michał Iwaniuk wrote religious
poetry, blessed people on his own authority, and spoke to all and sundry
of his visions. It is unclear whether he was Roman Catholic or Orthodox;
Jewish sources are usually mute on the differences among various sorts
of Christianity. In either case, he would have been a heretic and a
blasphemer; he was certainly an outsider, living beyond the reach of
religious and other institutions. Iwaniuk helped something like sixty Jews
over the course of the war. When asked why he did so, he said that the
Virgin Mary had appeared before him and instructed him to save people.
Roman Catholic nuns were outsiders of a different kind. They and their
convents were entirely subordinate to the hierarchy and the teachings of
their church. They kept a distance from the everyday politics of religion—
as women in an institution directed by men and in which only men can
serve as priests, and as people living in isolation from the world in
pursuit of specific forms of devotion. Polish Roman Catholic nuns saved
hundreds, if not thousands, of Jewish children. In some cases, they
wanted to convert Jewish children to the Roman Catholic faith. Michał
Głowiński’s mother, when she found her son alive after the war, was
happy to allow the nuns to baptize him in recognition of what they had

done and risked. From the theological perspective of the Catholic Church,
the rescue of souls was more important than the preservation of earthly
lives. In the politics of the Catholic Church, the conversion of the children
made them Christians.
For the nuns in their convents—women who had left their earthly
families or who had none—children had a certain special appeal that
older Jews might not have. Yet, in a rather large number of cases, Polish
Roman Catholic nuns also rescued young Jewish men, who for any
number of reasons did not belong in a convent. Anna Borkowska, for
example, the mother superior of a Dominican convent near Vilnius, aided
several Jews. One of her favorites was a passionate and intelligent young
man called Aryeh Wilner, whom she called “Jurek” (a Polish diminutive
for Jerzy, or George). After Wilner left the convent and went to Warsaw,
he used “Jurek” as his nom de guerre in the Jewish underground and in
his contacts with Poles on the Aryan side of the city. In 1943, Wilner was
entrusted with the mission of securing support and arms from the Home
Army before the uprising in the ghetto. Fighting broke out while he was
beyond its walls, and so his descriptions of the motives of the ghetto
fighters reached Poles and thus the world. The uprising was not about
preserving Jewish life, he explained, but about rescuing dignity. His
Polish interlocutors understood this in their own national romantic
terms: that Jewish self-sacrifice was meant to redeem the Jewish nation.
Wilner seems to have meant something more general. The ghetto
uprising was about the dignity of human beings, and thus a challenge to
everyone who might have done more but instead did less. If it was
redemption, it was also rebuke.
Jurek returned to the flaming ghetto, where he was killed as Aryeh.
—
Oswald Rufeisen was a young Zionist from southwestern Poland who
spoke German as well as Polish. His parents had been subjects of the
Habsburg monarchy and enrolled him in a primary school where German
was the language of instruction. He was then sent to live with an aunt in
Bielsko so that he could continue his schooling in a German-language
gymnasium. There he joined Akiba, a Zionist organization, and learned to
ride horses with a Polish friend. Rufeisen’s family was integrated into

Polish society; his father served for eight years in the Polish army. Young
Oswald never experienced antisemitism. Nevertheless, the idea of
Zionism—of a land for the Jewish people—gave him a sense of belonging
during the years that he spent away from home. When the German army
invaded Poland in September 1939, he fled eastward like hundreds of
thousands of other Polish Jews, with the idea of eventually reaching
Palestine.
Using the Akiba network, he tried to reach a Baltic port where he could
catch a ship. He got as far as Latvia, by then a Soviet republic, but was
sent back by the NKVD to Lithuania. He managed to escape the border
police and make his way to Vilnius, by then the capital of Soviet
Lithuania, where he looked for and found fellow Akiba members. Tens of
thousands of Jewish refugees had joined the hundred thousand or so
Jews who were native to the city. Rufeisen took up several trades,
including shoe making, to sustain himself. He found that he liked
Russians, but assumed that he and other Jewish refugees in Vilnius
would eventually be deported by the NKVD, just as Jews from eastern
Poland had been. Instead the Germans invaded in June 1941, and
Rufeisen was arrested not long after by a Lithuanian policeman in the
German service. When asked for his profession he said that he was a
shoemaker; this spared him from being shot at Ponary, since the
Germans happened to need shoemakers. In September 1941, he observed
a roundup of Jews in Vilnius and decided to hide. Seeing an intoxicated
German surrounded by Polish teenagers, he took a chance and helped the
man find his way. The German confided in him that he and his comrades
had shot 1,700 Jews that day; this was why he was so drunk.
Rufeisen now understood what was happening to the Jews of Vilnius
and decided to leave the city. A chance acquaintance offered him work on
his farm just beyond its outskirts, three kilometers from the killing site at
Ponary. A Belarusian veterinarian who treated the cattle there told
Rufeisen that he was welcome to join his family in a safer and more
isolated place and wrote him a letter of recommendation. Rufeisen
decided to go. The village was called Turets and was not safe; its Jews
were all murdered in November 1941, shortly before Rufeisen’s arrival.
He found a job as a janitor at the school, working for meals. He took
some of the clothing of the murdered Jews when it was distributed
among the villagers.

The Belarusian family with whom he was living asked him to register
with the police, which meant the local Belarusian auxiliary policemen
serving the Germans. The police commander was so impressed with
Rufeisen’s German that he tried to hire him as a German tutor.
Eventually, Rufeisen came to work as a translator between the Belarusian
gendarmes and the German policemen stationed at Mir. He presented
himself as a Pole with a German father. He was formally employed by the
German police, and wore a German uniform. Much of the work was on
horseback, and he had to be present at mass shootings of Jews. At some
point he met a Jew from Mir whom he had known in Vilnius, and began
to pass news to him that might help local Jews. From his new position
inside the German police outpost, Rufeisen warned the Jews of Mir that
they were all to be killed on August 13, 1942. He even smuggled them
some weapons. Some three hundred Jews escaped Mir as a result.
Denounced to the police by a Jew from Mir as the person who had
provided the warning, Rufeisen admitted to his German employer that
this was the case. In the course of a conversation about his motives he
admitted, of his own volition, that he was Jewish. The German
policeman, shocked by this confession, treated him with a good deal of
sympathy, saying that Rufeisen was foolish to admit such a thing. Rather
than arranging for his execution, his superior made a vague remark about
how Rufeisen might somehow survive and left him unattended. Rufeisen
made a break for it, and although he was pursued by the men who had
been his colleagues and even fired upon, he had the impression that not
all of the policemen wanted to catch him.
As he fled, Rufeisen happened to see a nun, which gave him an idea. He
slipped through the gates of the local cloister of the Sisters of the
Resurrection. This was an unusual order, founded by a Polish mother and
daughter and devoted to the particular Polish martyrological tradition of
national sacrifice. He asked the nuns for help. They were afraid. They
knew that Rufeisen was a Jew and that others in the area knew this as
well. They told him that they would pray for guidance. That day the
homily in the sermon happened to be the parable of the Good Samaritan
(Luke 10:25–37), which the two women took as a sign from God. In the
story a Jew is robbed and beaten and needs help, and he is aided not by
one of his own but by a member of a foreign and hostile tribe, a
Samaritan. The nuns could hear the parable of the Good Samaritan as

simple guidance from a place of authority to help a stranger. But as they
themselves must have understood, the parable had a deeper significance.
Jesus recited it while discussing with his disciples a crucial biblical
passage, Leviticus 19:18: “Thou shalt not avenge, nor bear any grudge
against the children of thy people, but thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself: I am the LORD.” Jesus told his disciples that “Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself,” after the duty to love God with heart, soul, and
mind, was the most important of God’s commandments (Luke 10:27,
Matthew 22:39, Mark 12:31). The disciples then wanted to know whom
they should regard as their people and whom they should regard as their
neighbor. It was these questions that Jesus answered with the story of the
Good Samaritan, of the stranger who helps a stranger. Then he asked his
disciples who was the neighbor in the story, and they answered: “He that
shewed mercy on him.” Jesus then told them: “Go, and do thou likewise.”
Rufeisen was taken by the nuns to their cloister and sheltered for more
than a year. “It is difficult even to imagine the subterfuges to which the
Sisters had to resort in order to enable me to stay,” he later recalled,
“especially in the autumn and winter, and even to make my stay more
pleasant.” He spent his time in the cloister reading the New Testament.
Still a Zionist, Rufeisen discovered in Jesus an image of the Jew at home
in Palestine. In December 1943, when his presence seemed to be
endangering the cloister, he agreed to leave, dressed as a nun. He
encountered a Jew from Mir, who led him to Soviet partisans. The unit in
question was shooting all of the Poles in its ranks, so Rufeisen was now
eager to prove that he was a Jew. Other Jews from Mir whom Rufeisen
had saved were with Tuvia Bielski and his family camp. So Rufeisen
served with Bielski’s men for a time. Then he allowed himself to be
persuaded by Jews he had saved at Mir to go to work for the Soviets as
the Red Army returned to the region. He served in the NKVD for three
months, writing reports on the behavior of people he had known during
the war. Rufeisen was one of countless people who worked for the
security apparatuses of both Nazi Germany and the USSR, but of course
one of the very few Jews who managed to do so. Finally he made his way
to Cracow and there joined a monastery.
Andrei Sheptyts’kyi, the Greek Catholic metropolitan, referred to the
parable of the Good Samaritan in his communications with his Ukrainian
flock. “Understand,” he wrote, “that everything that you do in the

direction of loving your neighbor in this way will bring God’s blessing to
your family and village.” Michał Iwaniuk, known as the Saint, also cited
the parable, if imprecisely. Five Jews who were rescued by a Roman
Catholic priest in Krosno would later cite a reference he had made
familiar: “love thy neighbor.” Among the thousands of individual Polish
Roman Catholics who chose to help Jews, many explained their
motivations by the same reference, inexact but unmistakable: the duty to
“help a neighbor.”
For such men and women, to be a neighbor was a reciprocal
relationship: a neighbor was someone who helped another, or someone
who needed help from another; someone who showed mercy, or someone
who needed mercy. Humanity recognized itself in the suffering other.
During the war, Oswald Rufeisen read the New Testament in hiding in a
cloister, but when he joined a monastery he took an Old Testament name:
Daniel, the interpreter of dreams, the prophet of calamities. The
Christians who showed mercy to Jews such as Rufeisen were exceptions
in the moral catastrophe that was Christianity during the Holocaust. In a
time of inundation, they worked quietly against the current, surfacing to
help, and then disappearing.

12
The Righteous Few

Ita Straż, a young woman of nineteen, was pulled by Lithuanian
policemen to a long pit in the Ponary Forest. She had heard the firing of
the guns and now could see the rows of corpses. “This is the end,” she
thought. “And what have I seen of life?” She stood with others naked at
the edge of the trench as the bullets flew past her head and body. She fell
straight backward, not feigning death, simply from fright. She remained
motionless as one body after another fell on top of her. When the pit was
full, someone walked on top of the final layer of corpses, firing downward
into the heap. A bullet passed through Ita’s hand, but she made no sound.
Earth was thrown over the pit. She waited for as long as she could, and
then pushed her way through the bodies and dug through the soil.
Without clothing, covered only in mud and in the blood of herself and
others, she sought help. She visited one cottage and was turned away, and
then a second, and then a third. In the fourth cottage she found help, and
she survived.
Who lives in the fourth cottage? Who acts without the support of
norms or institutions, representing no government, no army, no church?
What happens when the encounters in grey, of Jews needing help
contacting people with some connection to an institution, give way to
simple meetings of strangers, encounters in black? Most Jews most of the
time were turned away, and died. When the outside world offered threats
but no promises, the few people who acted to rescue Jews often did so
because they could imagine how their own lives might be different. The
risk to self was compensated by a vision of love, of marriage, of children,
of enduring the war into peace and into some more tranquil future.
In the simplest form, this vision was one of sexual desire. In her

recollections of escape from trains to both the Gulag and Bełżec, Zelda
Machlowicz does not say that she was attractive; nor does she need to:
Her tone and her story suffice. Zelda was a country girl, the daughter of a
family of Jewish farmers in interwar Poland, in eastern Galicia, today in
western Ukraine. Many Jews farmed in this part of the world. Whereas
Jews in the Russian Empire had been forbidden to own land beyond the
towns, Jews in the Habsburg monarchy had been allowed to farm. After
the Habsburg monarchy was destroyed by the First World War and
Galicia became part of Poland, thousands of Jews continued to till the soil
and to raise livestock. The Machlowicz family were among these until the
Soviet invasion of eastern Poland. In 1940, the NKVD deported the family
as “kulaks,” people who owned too much property.
Zelda jumped from the Soviet deportation train, leaving her parents
behind, and made for the town of Rawa Ruska, where she hid from Soviet
authorities. When the Germans arrived in June 1941, she was already
accustomed to living by her wits. She sought to avoid the German
shooting campaigns and then, beginning in early 1942, transport to the
German death facility at Bełżec. Zelda was concealing not her person but
rather her identity, frequenting places where she was not known and
presenting herself as a Ukrainian girl. She did not enter the ghetto and
did not wear the star by which Jews were supposed to mark themselves.
She had certain advantages. As a woman, she carried no physical sign of
Jewishness. She was most likely wearing clothes that revealed that she
was rural but not that she was Jewish. Like other Jews from the
countryside, she could speak Ukrainian well, and could perform certain
feats that non-Jews believed that Jews could not, such as saddle and ride
a horse. She was never recognized as a Jew by a stranger, but she was,
after a time, recognized by people she knew.
Most of the police power, under German as under Soviet occupation,
was local. Although Zelda was not from Rawa Ruska, she ran the risk
every day that one of the Ukrainian auxiliary policemen would recognize
her. One day two of them did. They stopped—teenage boys themselves—
and taunted her. “Come with us to Bełżec,” they said, “where you can
rest.” A third Ukrainian policeman ran up and joined them; Zelda
recognized Pietrek Hroshko, with whom she had attended school before
the war. “Don’t take her,” he told his colleagues. “She’s my fiancée from
before the war, I’ll keep her.” In Ukrainian, the word “fiancée” has a

much broader meaning than in English: more like “girlfriend.” The first
two Ukrainian policemen left him to it. Then Pietrek turned to Zelda, and
an exchange began that revealed not only the complexity of the death
around them, but the sophistication of the young life within them.
P: “I saved your life. Be with me. I’ve wanted you for a long time, since
before the war, when you were in sixth grade.”
Z: “Listen, you could only take advantage of me. I’m a Jew and you are
a German policeman. So do with me now what you like. Or wait, and
later, when the war is over, perhaps we can marry.”
P: “I swear I won’t lay a finger on you. Come home with me.”
Z: “Thank you, no. God will repay you.”
P: “You’ll regret this—I will hide you.”
Z: “I don’t want to make trouble for your career with the Germans. You
know that I’m alone, I’m barely sixteen, but I’ll be fine.”
P: “Remember me.”
Later Zelda was denounced by a fellow Jew and deported to Bełżec. She
escaped from that train as well, although she was shot and wounded. She
was found by a Ukrainian family who took her for a Ukrainian and nursed
her back to health. The young man of the family was a policeman in the
service of the Germans, and he, too, was attracted to Zelda. “Mom,” he
said, “you’ve brought me a fiancée.” Zelda decided to make her way to
Lwów and join a cloister. On the way she stole identity documents from a
Ukrainian girl who was sitting next to her on the train. As the saying in
Lwów went, the passport held body and soul together. Zelda stole the
girl’s identity and took on a series of jobs, one of which was falsifying
German documents.
—
A Jewish woman might be rescued by a new lover—someone she met in
hiding, who proposed marriage and so a new home and shelter. Alicja
Rottenberg left the Warsaw ghetto to seek shelter on the Aryan side. She
and two female cousins hid first with the secretary of her uncle. There

they were denounced and had to flee. Next they found a place with a
sailor, but had to leave because of unwanted sexual attention. After that
they were lodged by a former prostitute, who took a liking to Alicja. The
former prostitute was unable to keep the three young women for very
long, but she did find them a new refuge with her sister and her sister’s
two daughters, who were to be paid by Alicja. The cohabitation of five
young women in an unconventional situation brought tensions of the
conventional kind.
A friend of the house, a young man called Zdzisław Barański, began to
pay more attention to Alicja than to the two sisters. When he proposed
marriage to Alicja rather than to one of them, they became jealous and
denounced Alicja to her suitor as a Jew. Alicja hoped to spare Zdzisław
the trouble she knew would ensue. “I could see for myself that the
situation was unpleasant. I decided to tell Barański that, for our common
good, we should break off the relationship. The next evening when
Barański came to see me I began to speak in a delicate way about ending
our understanding. He responded immediately that he already knew
about everything, and that it was all of no significance to him. He
promised to take care of me and to help me insofar as he could.”
At that point the host family decided to steal everything from their
Jewish tenants and then denounce them to the police. The decision
probably arose not so much from anger as from calculation. When the
sisters told Zdzisław that Alicja was Jewish, they were, in effect,
denouncing their mother as someone who was illegally sheltering Jews
and themselves as conspirators. In a moment of human jealousy they had
endangered the lives of their mother and of themselves. The only way to
ensure their own safety, to know that Zdzisław would not denounce them,
was to be rid of the Jews. Alicja was safe: Her fiancé was as good as his
word and found her a new shelter in the outskirts of Warsaw. Alicja’s two
cousins were shot the next day. Alicja and Zdzisław did indeed marry
after the war. They had a daughter and were later divorced.
—
A wife might save a husband, or a husband a wife. Sofia Eyzenshteyn was
a midwife in Kyiv, in Soviet Ukraine, known for her “golden hands.” In
September 1941, the Germans shot most of the Jews who had remained

in the city at Babyi Iar. Sofia’s husband, who was not Jewish, dug a
shelter for her in the back of a courtyard. He disguised her as a homeless
person and led her there. Then, continuing what must have been a family
routine, he walked the dog and spoke to it. When he approached the
hiding place, he addressed the flow of speech to his wife. He brought her
food and water. She found the hiding unbearable and asked him to
poison her. This he did not do. She survived.
—
Love for children could also bring about rescue.
Katarzyna Wolkotrup was a Polish grandmother. She lived in
Baranowicze with her children and their families: She had a married
daughter, a married son, and an unmarried son. Her daughter and sonin-law had a baby, Katarzyna’s first and only grandchild. Her three
children were on friendly terms with a Jewish couple, Michał and Chana,
who had a baby of the same age. Michał and Chana hid in the basement
of the house with their little daughter. The baby would cry, and Grandma
Katarzyna, at Chana’s request, would take the baby out for air. This was
much safer than Michał or Chana appearing outside and indeed almost
without risk: The baby was a girl and so not circumcised, and anyone
watching would likely see nothing more than a grandmother with her
own grandchild. There was no more typical sight in Poland, where the
grandmothers raise the children.
One day when Katarzyna was out with Michał and Chana’s baby, she
heard loud noises back at the house and was afraid to return. When she
finally did she found everyone dead: not only Michał and Chana, but also
her own three children, her son-in-law, her daughter-in-law, and her
baby grandchild. They had been denounced by a neighbor, who probably
got the house as a reward. At the age of fifty-four, now without any of her
family and without the future she had expected, Katarzyna left
Baranowicze for good. She kept the little girl as her own, raising her, as
the Jews who interviewed her after the war noted, to be “healthy and
lovely.”
Nannies also raise children, and love them. In Warsaw, Maria
Przybylska had worked for the Lewin family as the nanny of little Regina,
raising her for the first years of her life. From the Warsaw ghetto,

Regina’s father made contact with Maria. After he was deported to
Treblinka and murdered, his wife and daughter left the ghetto for the
Aryan side and found Maria. Regina’s nanny took them both in, her
former ward and her former employer, and found them both shelter.
Regina could more easily pass as Polish, presumably at least in part
because she had been raised by a Polish nanny. She lived with some of
Maria’s Polish friends, to whom she was introduced as Maria’s niece.
Regina’s mother, on the other hand, was recognizably Jewish in her
speech and appearance. It was agreed that Regina’s mother would stay
with a male friend of Maria.
Maria was now working for a German family, from whom she stole
food and coal for Regina and her mother. Maria’s friend gave Regina’s
mother his own bed and slept on the floor. A cook in a restaurant, he stole
meat for the woman under his care, taking none for himself. Regina,
writing from Sweden in 1946 as a seventeen-year-old, had this to say
about the woman and man who saved her and her mother: “I owe to
those people everything, that today I can see the sun and look at people,
that I exist and enjoy life and freedom. I don’t know if anyone from my
own family would have made such a sacrifice and cared for us, the way
that they cared for us and loved us.”
Men sometimes took in children, because their wives asked them to or
because they wanted to themselves. Sergiusz Seweryn adopted a threeyear-old orphan girl who was known in his village, near Białystok, to be
one of two Jewish survivors. He loyally raised her until his wife left him,
taking the child. Stanisław Jeromiński, also from the Białystok region,
took in the one-year-old daughter of a Jewish acquaintance. After the war
he did not want to part with the girl: “He regards her as his daughter and
says that he risked his head for her”—which, in fact, he had.
Sometimes men lost their own children, and missed them, and did
something about it. This was how Rachela Koch and her two daughters
survived. The Koch family had lived before the war in Kołomyja, a city in
Galicia where almost no Jews survived the war. Rachela and her two girls
tried to escape the shooting actions by fleeing to a bunker. They were the
last three in and so got the worst place, in the darkness and fetidity of the
very deepest hole. As a result, they escaped the shooting when the
hideout was found.

After climbing out, the three of them awaited death, in grief and
misery, at the side of the road. A passing Pole, Michał Federowicz,
recognized them as Jews, as most Poles could with most Jews most of the
time. He asked them why they were courting death so openly; they
expressed their resignation. He took all three of them in, the mother and
the two daughters, and treated them as if they were his own. His three
children, he told Rachela and her daughters, had been taken away by the
Germans. Michał must not have been a young man, and these must have
been grown children, since he regarded not only Rachela’s daughters but
also Rachela herself as a child. “As a protest,” he told them, “it would be
right and good to take in three other children.”
Women lost children, and the absence was felt by those closest to them.
Ewa Krcz, for example, a mother in a village not far from the Polish town
of Oświęcim, lost her daughter Genia during the war. She was
inconsolable. Her little boy knew how he could help. Nearby was the
complex of camps and killing facilities that the Germans had built around
the Polish military base at Oświęcim: Auschwitz. Here was a place where,
at war’s end, there were many children who desperately needed care.
The last major transports to Auschwitz were of the Jews of Hungary,
most of whom were murdered, but some of whom were still working as
slave laborers when the camp was closed. The adults were marched in
horrible conditions toward Germany, the children left behind. Many of
the boys and girls were already orphans; others were becoming orphans
as surviving parents fell behind on the death marches and were shot.
Some were too young to know their own names. Ewa’s son, at his own
initiative, walked into Auschwitz and chose a two-year-old girl who he
thought would please his mother. The child was very ill, but Ewa nursed
her back to health and raised her. Later the girl would seek her birth
parents in Hungary. She did not find them.
Childless couples did not lose children, but they sometimes found
them. A Jewish girl from Nowograd-Wołyńsk in Volhynia survived the
mass shooting in a trench where her mother and sister were murdered.
She ran from hut to hut in the forest, and finally found shelter with a
young woman. There the girl was beaten so long and brutally that the
neighbors complained of the noise and told her to seek shelter
somewhere else. She finally met an older Ukrainian couple, Marko and
Oksana Verbievka, who seemed sympathetic and who listened to her

story: her life, the pit, the shootings, the flight, the beatings. They cried as
they listened to her. And then Oksana said: “Be at peace, little child,
forget all this; you will be a daughter to us, we have no children,
everything will be yours.”
And then, after a moment: “But you won’t abandon us later, will you?”
The girl stayed with Marko and Oksana for the rest of the war, and then
left them.
—
The words of Oksana and Marko, Ukrainian peasants, convey the sadness
of childlessness, the inevitability of aging, the desire to transcend death
through posterity, but also the simple and present need for help on a
farm. This was an age of agriculture. These eastern reaches of interwar
Poland, today western Belarus or western Ukraine, were still almost
entirely agrarian. The farming was without machinery, requiring intense
animal and human labor. The Great Depression had hit hard and lasted
long in this part of the world, separating farmers from markets, turning
them back to self-sufficiency. Economics was more about labor than
about exchange—about producing enough so that humans and animals
could survive the winter to produce again the next summer. There was
usually enough manpower to go around; thanks to the international
immigration limitations of the 1920s and 1930s, there had in fact been
too much. This would change under German rule.

In the invasion of the Soviet Union of 1941, which was launched from
precisely these territories, the Germans had taken many of the horses,
since even the army of the famed Blitzkrieg moved chiefly by horsepower.
When Operation Barbarossa did not go as planned, and the Germans had
to send millions more of their own young men to the front, they replaced
the lost labor in Germany by taking men and women from eastern
Europe. At first this was by recruitment, and then by impressment, and
finally in murderous campaigns. As millions of Poles, Ukrainians,
Belarusians, and Russians were brought to Germany, the country became

more Slavic in its population than it had been since the Middle Ages. This
left parts of eastern Europe starved for labor, and countless families
desperate for help in the pastures and fields. Hundreds of Jewish
children, perhaps a few thousand, survived because peasant families
needed labor. Most of them were orphans.
Noema Centnewschwer, from the Białystok region, was about ten when
the Germans invaded and the mass killing of Jews began. She worked at
seven homesteads in the countryside before she found one where she
could stay. It was a large farm where the children were too small to work
and where there was only one farmhand. “After a few days,” she
remembered, “they sensed that I was Jewish, but they let me stay anyway.
They weren’t kind, they brought up my Jewishness, but they didn’t let me
go hungry.” Chawa Rozensztejn was from the same part of the world,
from the town of Łomża. She survived the pogrom of Jews by Poles in the
town in 1941 and then the clearing of the ghetto in 1942. At the age of six,
she made her way alone to the surrounding villages. As a nine-year-old,
she recalled that the peasants she found were “friendly enough when I
worked conscientiously.”
Szyja Flejsz was a boy of about Noema’s age from Volhynia. He hid in
several villages and then made for the woods with some other boys. He
worked for a time as a shepherd, then followed advice to go to
Woronówka, a small settlement inhabited only by Poles. During the
Soviet period in 1940, the NKVD had deported two villagers. The
Germans assumed control in 1941. By the time Szyja arrived in early
1943, the surrounding woods were the site of the partisan war between
Soviets and Germans. By day, as he remembered, everyone tried to keep
peace with the Germans, and by night with the Soviets.
Szyja was taken in by Zygmunt Kuriata. Of some forty-two huts in
Woronówka, twenty-two belonged to members of the Kuriata family,
which perhaps created a sense of trust. One of the two people deported
from the village by the NKVD had been a member of the family, but
Zygmunt seems not to have drawn any specious conclusions about Jews
and communism. Zygmunt knew that Szyja was a Jewish orphan and
treated him well. He wanted Szyja to learn prayers, perhaps to help him
blend in, since forced recital of the Lord’s Prayer was one way Christians
tested Jews; or perhaps to save his soul. Perhaps neither, or both. But
Szyja thought of his murdered parents: “My father was a Jew, my mother

was a Jew, and I want to be a Jew.” Kuriata received this with
equanimity: “A Jew is a Jew, he does not want to pray.”
In 1943 in Volhynia, a third force entered the partisan war. Ukrainian
nationalists, in these extreme conditions, were able to establish their own
partisan army. In the first months of the year, many of the Ukrainians
who had been serving the Germans as auxiliary policemen went to the
woods and joined the Ukrainian Insurgent Army (UPA). This formation
emerged as a result of the triple occupation of Volhynia and other lands
inhabited by Ukrainians that had been part of Poland until 1939. The
Soviet occupation had destroyed legal Ukrainian political parties and
discredited the radical Ukrainian Left. Then the German occupation
offered thousands of young Ukrainian men—some of whom had already
been serving the NKVD as militiamen and assisting in the deportation of
Poles and others—training in methods of killing Jews and others. Then
the anticipated return of Soviet power, represented in late 1942 and early
1943 by the Soviet partisans, brought these policemen and others to the
woods, some of them as Soviet partisans, others to the UPA.
The commanders of the UPA, Ukrainian nationalists, meant to resist
the Soviets and establish a Ukrainian state, but their immediate task in
early 1943 was the ethnic cleansing of Poles. In a number of cases, this
meant the death of Jews who had taken shelter with Polish families; in at
least one case, a Jew who had a good hiding place rescued a Pole from
Ukrainians. In 1943, Poles and Jews in small settlements such as
Woronówka were amidst a three-sided German-Soviet-Ukrainian
partisan war, and in an impossible position. In June, the Germans set fire
to Woronówka as punishment for its supposed support of the Soviet
partisans. One member of the Kuriata family was burned alive. The
inhabitants who remained eked out a miserable existence among the
ruins, the forest, and neighboring villages. They were repeatedly attacked
by the Ukrainian partisans of the UPA, who burned down the last
building in the village in November. Each time the UPA attacked, Szyja
fled to the woods with his Polish family. In summer 1944, when regular
Soviet forces arrived, the NKVD completed the task of ethnic cleansing
that its Ukrainian nationalist enemy had begun. People of Polish and
Jewish origin were registered and deported west, beyond the restored
Molotov-Ribbentrop border, to a Poland that was itself being shifted to
the west. The last time the Soviets had been in control, in 1939, they had

deported people to the Gulag according to class criteria; this time they
deported people by ethnic criteria to the country where they were thought
to belong.
All of the surviving residents of Woronówka went west, and the locality,
battered by the first Soviet occupation, then by the German occupation,
then by Ukrainian partisans, and finally by the return of Soviet power,
ceased to exist. Zygmunt Kuriata and his wife registered Szyja as a
member of their family, and the three of them were transferred to distant
Silesia, to lands that Poland was allowed to take from Germany after the
war. Many surviving Polish Jews were resettled to Silesia after they were
expelled from the lands of eastern Poland that were claimed again by the
Soviet Union in 1945. So it was there, after the war, at the age of sixteen,
that Szyja again met Jews. He decided to leave his Polish family and
return to Jewish life. Zygmunt was clearly restraining emotions: “If you
want to go, we won’t hold you back; if you want to stay, we won’t make
you leave.” Zygmunt and his wife cried when Szyja left them.
Labor could be more or less exploitative, but labor itself was no sign of
hostility or alienation. This was a time and place where children worked;
the labor of children would have been taken for granted, in much of the
countryside anyway, in the general understanding of what a family was.
Some Jewish children could thus justify their existence by what they did,
and some of them, although by no means all, were loved in return. In the
end, then, the working farm was a sort of institution, both economic and
moral, in which Jewish children could find a place.
Like the bond between mothers and children, or fathers and children,
or nannies and children, a farmstead provided a relationship where some
Jewish children could fit. Like marriage, the prospect of marriage, or
sexual desire, labor could generate an image of the present or the future
where someone was missing, where someone was needed, where
someone could be added. That someone, sometimes, could be a Jew.
—
All of these situations, although extreme, were not the ultimate form of
self-sacrifice. In other cases of rescue there was truly no institution at all,
not even a purely private one such as a farm, home, family, or love affair.
What happened when there were no states, no diplomats, no armies, no

churches—and no human need for a relationship, and no way for the Jew
in search of shelter to provide anything useful? What happened when
there was no discernible human motivation at all, no connection between
the personal act of rescue and the world in which it took place, and no
vision as to how the Jew might supplement the future of others? Who
rescued then? Almost no one.
It seems simple: to see a person who is marked for extinction. And yet
no human encounter is simple. Every meeting has a setting, partly
designed by those who meet, partly designed by others, partly a matter of
chance. No historical event, even the Holocaust, is of such a scale as to
transcend the inherently specific character of each human interaction. No
quantity of meaning, no matter how sincerely ascribed, can void the
subjective quality of each meeting. The reasons why people helped or did
not help often had to do with something about the first encounter with
the Jew who needed their help. Since this was true, Jews sometimes
survived when they were able to think, if only for a moment, beyond their
own particular suffering and see the encounter from the perspective of
the other.
Joseł Lewin was from near Bielsk Podlaski, on the western edge of
marshy Polesia. His family had been killed, and he was wandering alone,
undecided about what to do, whether he should try to survive, and how.
He finally decided to take shelter in the barn of a peasant he knew, in a
settlement called Janowo. When the peasant found Joseł in the barn, the
peasant was surprised and frightened, as almost everyone was in these
circumstances. It is always a shock to find an unexpected person on one’s
property, and Poles in the countryside knew that Jews were no longer
supposed to exist. However they felt about that matter personally, Poles
knew that they were in violation of the German order, and likely the
norms of local society, the moment a Jew set foot on their land.
Seeing the peasant’s reaction, Joseł stopped him from speaking and
asked him for a small favor: not to do anything for thirty minutes, simply
to wait for that half an hour, and then come back to the barn. Then Joseł
would have something to tell him. When the peasant returned, this is
what he heard from Joseł: “I don’t want to live any longer; I’ll commit
suicide and you bury me.” The peasant responded: “The earth is frozen
two meters down; it will be hard to dig.” It was November 1943. What
were these two men, who had known each other for years, actually saying

to each other at that moment? “The earth is frozen two meters down; it
will be hard to dig.” Perhaps, just perhaps, what the peasant meant was
something like this: “I will not dig your grave; perhaps you too should
wait a while and think it over.” If Joseł had not given the peasant time to
calm down, perhaps the peasant would have reacted differently. If the
peasant had not remarked upon the hard weather, Joseł might have killed
himself. The peasant gave Joseł food and shelter for the next eight
months. Joseł lived.
Like Joseł Lewin, Cypa and Rywa Szpanberg thought that they had had
enough of life amidst death. They were in Aleksandra, a small settlement
not far from the city of Równo, in Volhynia. When Jews were ordered to
the ghetto in July 1942, the two women decided to spare themselves the
intermediate steps, and simply act in such a way that the Germans would
kill them. In central Poland, in the Warsaw ghetto, Jews could still be
fooled, or fool themselves, about what deportation meant. In places like
Volhynia, however, where the public mass murder of Jews had been
under way for a year, even false hope was close to impossible. So before
the transfer to the ghetto, Cypa and Rywa found a place that was
unknown to them, sat down together, cried, and waited for death.
The Pole who owned the land was a stranger to them. When he heard
their sobbing, he took the two women to his farm in Trzesłaniec.
Afterwards he took in eight more Jews. Would he have taken in any Jews
at all if not for that chance encounter with two tearful women who had
found their way to his property and were at his mercy? To be sure, most
people in his situation did not behave nearly so honorably, and many
behaved much worse. And yet without the decision of Cypa and Rywa to
control the timing of their own deaths, the landowner would never have
met them, and perhaps would never have undertaken to rescue Jews at
all. His efforts were all the more difficult in 1943, when the UPA began to
ethnically cleanse Poles from Volhynia. And yet nine of the ten Jews he
sheltered on his farm survived.
There were indeed people, although precious few of them, who felt
compelled by the simple need for help. Irena Lypszyc survived thanks to
one such person. She was a Warsaw Jew who fled to the eastern regions
of Poland to escape the German invasion of September 1939, only to find
herself unexpectedly under Soviet power. Such refugees were initially
helped by local Jewish communities, insofar as that was possible, but

were helpless when the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941.
Almost all of the local Jews were then killed, and the proportion of
already displaced Jews who died must have been close to a hundred
percent. After all, they had no prewar connections with the place where
they found themselves, and no knowledge of the terrain.
Like most such people, Irena Lypszyc did not know much about her
new surroundings. She was in Wysock, in Polesia, when the German
invasion came. When the Jews of the town were rounded up for execution
in September 1942, she ran into the swamps with her husband. It does
not seem that she had ever previously spent much time out of doors. The
two of them lived on berries and mushrooms for a few days before
deciding to risk making contact with the outside world. Irena decided
that she would stand on the first road she found, hail the first person she
saw, and ask for help.
The man approaching her had a double-barreled shotgun on his
shoulder and agreed to her request without batting an eye. As she came to
understand, he was a natural rebel, living from smuggling and moonshine
far away from any center of power, opposing whichever political system
claimed authority over him. In interwar Poland he had hidden
communists; when the Soviets invaded he had sheltered Poles from
deportation by the NKVD; and now that the Germans had come he was
helping Jews. He did not really seem to see a difference between one sort
of rescue and another.
Irena told his story but did not betray his name.
—
Other rescuers, with more orderly minds and more conventional ways of
being in the world, exhibited a mysterious steadfastness, a silently
understood need to remake a corner of the world, to transform the
overwhelming difficulty of the task into a kind of normalcy, where the
labor and its presentation become something like the preoccupation of an
entire personality. A private choreography of warmth and safety defied
the exterior social world of cold and doom.
Rena Krainik found herself by chance in the village of Kopaniny, in
eastern Galicia, not far from the city of Stanisławów. Wearing rags, she
knocked on the door of complete strangers, meaning to ask for shelter for

a few hours and expecting to be turned away. Instead, the Zamorski
family, a homemaker and a retired Polish army officer, took her in and
treated her as one of their own for the rest of the war. As Rena
remembered, “They didn’t ask me any questions, they didn’t demand any
documents, they didn’t scrutinize my face to see whether I was Jewish.
Mrs. Zamorska shared with me her very modest wardrobe, and the whole
family shared with me every bit of food from the miserable portions
allotted to the Poles.” Rena understood the risks that her hosts were
taking and appreciated their virtue. “I was penniless, naked, and
barefoot. The sacrifice was all the greater in a locality such as Kopaniny,
where every new arrival attracted attention.”
In the city of Stanisławów itself, where almost all of the Jews were
murdered, Janina Ciszewska took in eleven for most of the war. In a
house downtown she owned two apartments that were connected by an
interior door. She hid the Jews in the second apartment, the one that did
not open onto the hallway. At first she took in four people on behalf of a
friend. When the Jews’ money ran out, she took a job with the German
civilian administration, in the office that provided for the social welfare of
ethnic Germans. Janina spoke German and, at the Jews’ request,
registered herself as an ethnic German. She stole clothes and shoes from
her employers (some of which had likely been taken from the bodies of
murdered Jews), took them to the countryside, sold them at markets, and
used the money to feed her growing group of wards. She made light of all
the difficulties. She was, as one of the Jews she rescued wrote after the
war, a “brave, warm woman.” She kept on a bright, beaming face, so that
the Jews, as she said, would believe that she “could do anything.”
When he received a request, years after the war, to provide information
about his rescue of Jews, Bogdan Bazyli responded almost dismissively:
“you won’t believe me, ask the Teitelmans in Israel.” The Bazyli family
were Poles in the Pańska Dolina settlement, not far from the city of
Dubno, in Volhynia. The Teitelman family had fled the murder of the
Jews of Murowicz in September 1942. The Bazylis built them a dugout on
the family property and kept them there for the rest of the war. Every
morning, the Bazyli children brought food and took away a bucket of
urine and feces. The Bazyli family took in a total of twenty-two Jews, all
of whom survived the war. The Teitelmans supplied these facts from
Haifa, but like most Jews they had little to say about the motives of those

who saved them: “he who wanted to help in those terrible times did help.”
From the new world of Israel the Teitelman family wished Bogdan Bazyli
“a long and healthy life.”
Wanting to help was not enough. To rescue a Jew in these conditions,
where no structure supported the effort and where the penalty was death,
required something stronger than character, something greater than a
worldview. Generous people took humane decisions, yet still failed.
Probably most men and women of goodwill who were able to take the
initial risk failed after a month, a week, a day. It was an era when to be
good meant not only the avoidance of evil but a total determination to act
on behalf of a stranger, on a planet where hell, not heaven, was the
reward for goodness.
Good people broke. Mina Grycak found a peasant who sheltered her
family for months and then finally yielded to the pressure. He first tried
to kill the family in a clownish way that was bound to fail, and then
threatened to kill himself. Had the war lasted for months rather than for
years, his behavior would have been exemplary.
The nature of an encounter could end a rescue, just as it could begin
one. Abraham Ṡniadowicz and his son stayed with a peasant for two
months, and then began to share their place of shelter with two more
Jews. They did not tell their host. When the peasant learned of the
unannounced arrivals, he told all four Jews to leave. “I must emphasize,”
said Abraham, “that this Christian was a very good person.”
—
It is very hard to speak of the motivations of the men and women who
risked their lives to rescue Jews without any anchor in earthly politics
and without any hope of a gainful future with those whom they rescued.
To be motivated means to be moved by something. To explain a
motivation usually means the delineation of a connection between a
person and something beyond that person—something that beckons from
the world of today, or at least from an imagined future. None of that
seems pertinent here. Accounts of rescue recorded by Jews rarely include
evaluations of their rescuers’ motivations.
What Jewish survivors tend to provide is a description of disinterested
virtue. They tend to say, in one way or another, that their rescuers were

guided by a sense of humanity that transcended or defied the
circumstances. As Janina Bauman put it, “that we lived with them
strengthened what was noble in them, or what was base.” Anton Schmid
was an Austrian who employed Jews in the 1930s, defended them from
repressions in Vienna after the Anschluss in 1938, and rescued hundreds
from death as a German soldier. Those who knew him before and during
the war tended to say that he was menschlich—humane. Joseph C., who
escaped from the death facility at Treblinka, wept in his testimony when
he tried to describe the one Pole who helped him in his distress. The word
that he finally found to describe Szymon Całka was “humanity.”
Agnieszka Wróbel, who herself survived a German concentration camp,
rescued several Jews from the Warsaw ghetto, at great risk to herself.
Two of the Jews who lived with her wrote long and detailed accounts of
her actions, but neither tried to explain how she was capable of such
choices and actions. Instead, Bronisława Znider reflected that “the role of
people such as Agnieszka Wróbel was not so much that they rescued
people from death, but that in the hearts of people who were chased like
animals, in the spirits of Jews who were doomed to die, she aroused a bit
of hope that not everything good was lost, that there were still a handful
of human beings worthy of the name.”
If Jews had little to say about the reasons why they were rescued, the
rescuers themselves were even less forthcoming. They generally preferred
not to speak about what they did. Olha Roshchenko, a Ukrainian in Kyiv,
helped two of her friends to escape after the mass shooting at Babyi Iar. “I
did not save them,” she said. What she meant was that other people also
helped her friends, and that in the end her friends saved themselves. This
was of course true, and indeed was almost always true. Jews themselves
had to take the most exceptional actions if they were to survive, and those
who helped them were almost always a large group of people. Olha’s
friends reply in the same conversation: “There were a number of people
who helped Jews, and don’t always speak of it.” And this was also true.
People who did not rescue Jews claim to have done so, and people who
did rescue Jews often keep their peace. There is an unmistakable
tendency of rescuers, when they speak at all, towards a certain specific
modesty, a diffidence that verges on a general attempt not to answer
questions about motivation. When rescuers do say anything at all it is
almost always uninteresting: a banality of good that is so consistent

across gender, class, language, nation, and generation as to give pause.
Helena Chorążyńska, an uneducated peasant woman, provided this
explanation of why she took in Jews and kept them alive: “I always said
that when I grew up I would never let anyone leave my house naked or
hungry.” Thus the idea of hospitality was extended to the furthest,
darkest reaches of human experience. Was this imagination or a lack of
imagination? The German (Austrian) soldier Anton Schmid was kind to
people, including Jews. Kindness required ever greater personal risk as
circumstances grew ever worse; Schmid did not change as the world
changed, and was one of the few Germans to be executed for saving Jews.
In the letter that he wrote to his family just before his death, he did not
provide grand explanations for what he had done; he said he had simply
“acted as a human being” and regretted the grief he would cause by not
returning home to his loved ones. Feliks Cywiński, who helped twenty-six
Jews, spoke of a sense of “obligation.” Kazimiera Żuławska recalled a
“purely human sense of outrage.” Adam Zboromiski said that he needed
to “feel like a human being.”
Karolina Kobylec: “That is just the way I am.”
—
Jan Lipke was a Latvian who aided dozens of Jews in and around Riga.
One of the people who owed his life to Lipke said that the way he behaved
was “far beyond the limits of heroism and common sense.” Lipke placed
his own life in jeopardy several times, acting on behalf of people with
whom he had no prior connection. He himself said that his chosen course
was nothing at all extraordinary, that it was “normal.” Throughout
Europe, this is what rescuers said again and again: that they were
behaving normally. “We regarded it as the most normal thing to help
those who needed help”—thus the verdict of a Polish family who sheltered
two Jews for much of the war. They were not describing the normality
that they saw around them, of course. They were not acting as others
acted, or following the explicit or implicit prescriptions of those in power.
Their sense of normality must have come from within, or from something
learned and internalized before the war, since there were few or no
external sources of the norms they exemplified.
Deep in the forests or swamps, rescuers might hide Jews without many

other people noticing. But in the villages and towns, where every action
was noticed and commented upon, slight alterations in the motions of
everyday life could trigger everyday death. Jews could not be maintained
inside a house without some change in behavior outside the house. Every
transaction, every exchange, every purchase, everything that in normal
times happened unremarkably at the cash nexus, carried in these times
an additional social meaning. A family might be murdered because an
illiterate peasant bought, as a kindness for the Jews in his home, a
newspaper.
Rescuers were risking death, but not in the way people risk death in a
moment of wartime heroism. There were moments, of course, when
rescue resembled a battle, and these are the easiest to glorify. In the
stateless zones of eastern Europe, to shelter Jews meant risking one’s
own life and that of one’s family, at every moment, over the course of
weeks, months, or even years. The choice to rescue was not a choice of the
usual kind, to be followed by other choices that might undo or obviate the
first. It was a choice that, once made, impinged upon every aspect of
future life for multiple people over an indefinite period. It usually
demanded a certain amount of planning and a capacity to think about the
future in terms other than the conventional ones. A Belarusian peasant,
near Minsk, chose which of his crops to sow in the spring with a thought
to providing cover for his Jewish wards in the summer and fall.
—
Miron Lisikiewicz, who rescued Jews, asked: “What is money compared
to the life of a human being?” The notion of acting in one’s own economic
interests—for money—has little or no place here. Again and again Jews
stressed that the people who aided them were, apart from everything else,
either losing money or risking their lives to get the additional money they
needed to keep extra mouths fed. A Polish sewer worker fed ten Jews who
were hiding in the sewers of Lwów; to pay for the food, his wife sold her
clothes. Jan Lipke in Riga would get angry if anyone so much as
mentioned money. Bronisława Rozmaryn, who was given shelter in
Warsaw by Helena Kawka, remembered her rescuer this way: “She risked
her own life and that of her two beautiful little children in order to be able
to rescue us. She did this entirely without any material motivation,

wanting only to save four little Jewish children, who were wandering the
streets of Warsaw without any shelter.” Emanuel Ringelblum, the
chronicler of the Warsaw ghetto, believed that “there is not enough
money in the world to make up for the constant fear of exposure.” In
other words, some other consideration had to be at work aside from fear
and greed.
It is true that many Jewish recollections, especially those recorded long
after the war, include rather formulaic statements that their rescuers did
not receive material compensation. Such language was needed for people
to be recognized by Yad Vashem, the Israeli memorial of the Holocaust,
as “righteous gentiles,” rescuers of Jews. In order to clear the hurdle of
“no material considerations,” Jews who wanted their rescuers to be
honored sometimes simplified the story and claimed that no money was
involved. Of course, it often was. But the people who rescued Jews, as
opposed to those who betrayed or killed them, were almost never making
money. Valuables or cash might indeed be exchanged, but not in the
normal sense of a contract. There was no state to defend such contracts;
indeed, the authorities offered rewards for Jews so that they could be
murdered.
Money was important, since it is hard to sustain life without it. But a
Jew’s future depended on the individual taking the money, a person who
was operating in a radically altered political and economic world. Rather
than a normal market, in which individuals have property and determine
their value among themselves, this was a dark market. All property
relations had been destabilized, almost no one could be sure of their
economic future, and some people—the Jews—were not individuals with
the right to property and its exchange, but a special sort of human
contraband. To have Jews at home in the stateless zones of eastern
Europe, in occupied Poland and the occupied Soviet Union, was to risk
one’s life; to be willing to hand them over would bring salt or sugar or
vodka or money and the end of anxiety and fear. Turning in a Jew meant
avoiding the risk of individual and collective punishment.
Within this set of incentives, the economically rational response for a
non-Jew approached by a Jew was to promise help, take all of the Jew’s
money as quickly as possible, and then turn in the Jew to the police. The
economically rational action for someone who knew that someone else
was sheltering a Jew was to denounce that person before someone else

did to collect the reward and perhaps the property, and to avoid the risk
of being denounced oneself as someone who knew about the rescue. It
would be comforting to believe that people who brought about the death
of Jews were behaving irrationally, but in fact they were often following
standard economic rationality. The righteous few were behaving in a way
that a norm based upon economic calculations of personal welfare would
regard as irrational.
—
In the darkest of times and places, a few people rescued Jews for what
seems like no earthly reason. These tended to be people who in normal
times might seem to take ethical and social norms a bit too literally, and
whose fidelity to their expressed principles survived the end of the
institutions that supported and defended them.
If these rescuers had anything in common beyond that, it was selfknowledge. When you know yourself there is little to say. This is worth
brooding upon as we consider how we, who know ourselves so poorly and
have so much to say about ourselves, will respond to the challenges to
come.

Conclusion: Our World

In the small photograph that her son keeps in his Warsaw apartment,
Wanda J. radiates self-possession, a quality that stood her in good stead
during the Second World War and the German occupation of Poland. She
lost her husband at war’s end, but saved herself and their two boys. When
the Warsaw ghetto was created, she defied German orders and kept her
family from resettling there. Denounced as a Jew on the Aryan side of
Warsaw, she talked her way out of trouble. She moved her children from
place to place, relying upon the help of friends, acquaintances, and
strangers. When institutions were obliterated or warped in the aftermath
of German invasion, when first the ghetto and then the rest of the city of
Warsaw were burned to the ground, what counted, she thought, were the
“faultless moral instinct and basic human goodness” of the people who
chose to help Jews.
Most of the Jews of Warsaw did go to the ghetto and were murdered at
Treblinka. Vasily Grossman, a Soviet Jewish writer working as a
journalist in the Red Army who saw and described that place, wrote that
“kindness, this stupid kindness, is what is most truly human in a human
being.” Hitler denied that any idea, be it religious, philosophical, or
political, justified seeing the other (or loving the other) as oneself. He
claimed that conventional forms of ethics were Jewish inventions, and
that conventional states would collapse during the racial struggle.
Throughout Europe, but to different degrees in different places, German
occupation destroyed the institutions that made ideas of reciprocity seem
plausible. Where Germans obliterated conventional states, or annihilated
Soviet institutions that had just destroyed conventional states, they
created the abyss where racism and politics pulled together towards
nothingness. In this black hole, Jews were murdered. When Jews were
saved, it was often thanks to people who could act on behalf of a state or
by institutions that could function like a state. When none of the moral

illumination of institutions was present, kindness was all that remained,
and the pale light of the individual rescuers shone.
The state stood at the middle of the story of those who wished to kill
Jews, and of those who wished to save them. Its mutation within
Germany after Hitler’s rise to power in 1933 and then its destruction in
Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland in 1938 and 1939 transformed Jews
from citizens into objects of exploitation. The double assault upon state
institutions in the Baltic states and eastern Poland, at first by the Soviet
Union in 1939 and 1940 and then by Nazi Germany in 1941, created the
special field of experimentation where ideas of a Final Solution became
the practice of mass murder. The Holocaust as mass shooting extended as
far east into Soviet Belarus, Soviet Ukraine, and Soviet Russia as German
power reached. The German policy of total killing then spread back west
into territories that the Germans had conquered before the final, fateful
conflict with the USSR that began in 1941. The removal of institutions
had been, however, irregular throughout western, central, and southern
Europe; the Holocaust spread insofar as states were weakened, but no
further. Where political structures held, they provided support and
means to people who wished to help Jews.
Wanda J.’s judgment about the decisive importance of a sense of
humanity seems like a hopeful conclusion, but it is not. Good and evil can
be rendered visible, as in memoirs such as hers, but they are not easy to
summon or dismiss. Most of us would like to think that we possess the
qualities she named: “moral instinct” and “human goodness.” Perhaps we
imagine that we would be rescuers in some future catastrophe. Yet if
states were destroyed, local institutions corrupted, and economic
incentives directed towards murder, few of us would behave well. There is
little reason to think that we are ethically superior to the Europeans of
the 1930s and 1940s, or for that matter less vulnerable to the kind of
ideas that Hitler so successfully promulgated and realized. If we are
serious about emulating rescuers, we should build in advance the
structures that make it more likely that we would do so. Rescue, in this
broad sense, thus requires a firm grasp of the ideas that challenged
conventional politics and opened the way to an unprecedented crime.
—

To characterize Hitler as an antisemite or an anti-Slavic racist
underestimates the potential of Nazi ideas. His ideas about Jews and
Slavs were not prejudices that happened to be extreme, but rather
emanations of a coherent worldview that contained the potential to
change the world. His conflation of politics and science allowed him to
pose political problems as scientific ones and scientific problems as
political ones. He thereby placed himself at the center of the circle,
interpreting all data according to a scheme of a perfect world of racial
bloodshed corrupted only by the humanizing influence of Jews. By
presenting Jews as an ecological flaw responsible for the disharmony of
the planet, Hitler channeled and personalized the inevitable tensions of
globalization. The only sound ecology was to eliminate a political enemy;
the only sound politics was to purify the earth.
Science in fact possesses and enables a certain autonomy, one which a
sound politics must recognize rather than seek to subsume. The invisible
forces of the world are not conspiring Jews, but physical, chemical, and
biological regularities that we are ever more capable of describing. The
experience of a European empire, so important to Hitler, did have a
biological component, but not the one that he imagined. The unseen
advantage that enabled Europeans to conquer the Americas was not their
innate racial superiority but the microbes they unwittingly carried in
their bodies. The rapid conquest of the New World so admired by Hitler
was possible because the germs aided the conquerors. In imagining that
Slavs would fight “like Indians” on a receding frontier, Hitler ignored the
battle that Indians could not win: against contagious illnesses. Fighting
on their home continent, Germans lacked the immunological advantages
that Europeans had in North America. In eastern Europe, Germans
feared diseases so much that, when they were not busy calling Jews
“typhus bacteria,” they spared Jewish doctors so that they could treat
Germans infected with typhus. The colonialist had to bear disease in his
own bloodstream, not fear it in the blood of others. He won the world not
by cleansing it of imagined impurities but by bringing real impurities
with him.
When science is disengaged from politics, simple analyses such as
these reveal why Hitler’s territorial solution to ecological crisis made no
sense. As Hitler himself knew, there was a political alternative in the
1930s: that the German state abandon colonization and support

agricultural technology. The scientific approach to dwindling resources,
which Hitler insisted was a Jewish lie, held much more promise for
Germans (and for everyone else) than an endless race war. Scientists,
many of them Germans, were already preparing the way for the
improvements in agriculture known as the Green Revolution. Had Hitler
not begun a world war that led to his suicide, he would have lived to see
the day when Europe’s problem was not food shortage but surpluses.
Science provided food so quickly and bountifully that Hitlerian ideas of
struggle lost a good deal of their resonance. In 1989, a hundred years
after Hitler’s birth, world food prices were about half of what they had
been in 1939 when he began the Second World War—despite a huge
increase in world population and thus demand.
—
The abolition of politics and science empowered a Führer to define what
was good for his race, racialize German institutions, and then oversee the
destruction of neighboring states. His worldview also compressed time.
By combining what seemed like the pattern of the past (racial empire)
with what seemed like an urgent summons from the future (ecological
panic), Nazi thinking closed the safety valves of contemplation and
foresight. If past and future contained nothing but struggle and scarcity,
all attention fell upon the present. A psychic resolve for relief from a
sense of crisis overwhelmed the practical resolve to think about the
future. Rather than seeing the ecosystem as open to research and rescue,
Hitler imagined that a supernatural factor—the Jews—had perverted it.
Once defined as an eternal and immutable threat to the human species
and the whole natural order, Jews could be targeted for urgent and
extraordinary measures.
The test that was supposed to confirm Hitler’s idea of nature, the
campaign that was to rescue Germans from the intolerably
claustrophobic present, was the colonial war against the Soviet Union.
The 1941 invasion of the USSR threw millions of Germans into a war of
extermination on lands inhabited by millions of Jews. This was the war
that Hitler wanted; the actions of 1938, 1939, and 1940 were preparation
and improvisation, generating experience in the destruction of states. The
course of the war on the eastern front created two fundamental political

opportunities. At first, the zoological portrayal of Slavs justified the
elimination of their polities, creating the zones where the Holocaust could
become possible. Then, with time, Germany’s uncertain fortune revealed
the deep political logic of Hitler’s thinking. The war was presented as
both colonial (against the Slavs) and decolonial (against the Jews). As the
colonial war for Lebensraum faltered against the resistance of the Red
Army, Nazis emphasized instead the struggle to save the planet from
Jewish domination. Since Jews were held responsible for the ideas that
had supposedly suppressed the stronger races, only their extermination
could ensure victory. The SS men who had begun as state destroyers,
murdering members of groups thought to be the bastions of enemy
polities, now became the mass murderers of Jews. Wherever German
power undid Soviet power, significant numbers of local people joined in
the killing. In occupied Poland in 1942, most Jews were deported from
their ghettos and murdered by gassing, as at Treblinka. The Jews of the
rest of Europe would survive Hitler’s murderous logic only insofar as they
and their neighbors remained attached to the conventional state
institutions. In the dark zones of statelessness, survivors such as Wanda
J. needed good fortune and virtuous assistance.
The idea of rescue seems close to us; the ideology of murder seems
distant. Ecological panic, state destruction, colonial racism, and global
antisemitism might seem exotic. Most people in Europe and North
America live in functional states, taking for granted the basic elements of
sovereignty that preserved the lives of Jews and others during the war:
foreign policy, citizenship, and bureaucracy. After two generations, the
Green Revolution has removed the fear of hunger from the emotions of
electorates and the vocabulary of politicians. The open expression of
antisemitic ideas is a taboo in much of the West, if perhaps a receding
one. Separated from National Socialism by time and luck, we find it easy
to dismiss Nazi ideas without contemplating how they functioned. Our
forgetfulness convinces us that we are different from Nazis by shrouding
the ways that we are the same.
—
Just as Hitler’s worldview conflated science and politics, his program
confused biology with desire. The concept of Lebensraum unified need

with want, murder with convenience. It implied a plan to restore the
planet by mass murder and a promise of a better life for German families.
Since 1945, one of the two senses of Lebensraum has spread across most
of the world: a living room, the dream of household comfort in consumer
society. The other sense of Lebensraum is habitat, the realm that must be
controlled for physical survival, inhabited perhaps temporarily by people
characterized as not quite fully human. In uniting these two passions in
one word, Hitler conflated lifestyle with life. For the vision of a wellstocked cupboard people should endorse the bloody struggle for other
people’s land. Once standard of living is confused with living, a rich
society can make war upon those who are poorer in the name of survival.
Tens of millions of people died in Hitler’s war not so that Germans could
live, but so that Germans could pursue the American dream in a
globalized world.
At precisely this point Hitler’s theory allowed him to join globalization
with domestic politics. Hitler was right to believe that, in an age of global
communication, notions of prosperity had become relative and fluid.
After his pursuit of Lebensraum failed with the final German defeat in
1945, the Green Revolution satisfied demand in Europe and much of the
world, providing not just the food needed for bare physical survival, but a
sense of security and an anticipation of plenitude. Yet no scientific
solution is eternal; the political choice to support science buys time, but
does not guarantee that future choices will be good ones. Another
moment of choice, a bit like the one Germans faced in the 1930s, could be
on the way.
The Green Revolution, perhaps the one development that most
distinguishes our world from Hitler’s, might be reaching its limits. This is
not so much because there are too many people on earth, but because
more of the people on earth demand ever larger and more secure supplies
of food. World grain production per capita peaked in the 1980s. In 2003,
China, the world’s most populous country, became a net importer of
grain. In the twenty-first century, world grain stocks have never exceeded
more than a few months’ supply. During the hot summer and droughts of
2008, fires in fields led major food suppliers to cease exports altogether,
and food riots broke out in Bolivia, Cameroon, Egypt, Haiti, Indonesia,
the Ivory Coast, Mauritania, Mozambique, Senegal, Uzbekistan, and
Yemen. In 2010, the prices of agricultural commodities spiked again,

leading to protests, revolution, ethnic cleansing, and revolution in the
Middle East.
Though the world is not likely to run out of food as such, richer
societies may again become concerned about future supplies. Their elites
could find themselves once again facing choices about how to define the
relationship between politics and science. As Hitler demonstrated,
merging the two opens the way to ideology that can seem to both explain
and resolve the sense of panic. In a scenario of mass killing that
resembled the Holocaust, leaders of a developed country might follow or
induce panic about future shortages and act preemptively, specifying a
human group as the source of an ecological problem, destroying other
states by design or by accident. There need not be any compelling reason
for concern about life and death, as the Nazi example shows, only a
momentary conviction that dramatic action is needed to preserve a way of
life.
It seems reasonable to worry that the second sense of the term
Lebensraum, seeing other people’s land as habitat, is latent. In much of
the world, the dominant sense of time is coming to resemble, in some
respects, the catastrophism of Hitler’s era. During the second half of the
twentieth century—the decades of the Green Revolution—the future
appeared as a gift that was on the way. The dueling ideologies of
capitalism and communism accepted the future as their realm of
competition and promised a coming bounty. In the plans of government
agencies, the plotlines of novels, and the drawings of children, the future
was resplendent in anticipation. This sensibility seems to have
disappeared. In high culture the future now clings to us, heavy with
complications and crises, dense with dilemmas and disappointments. In
vernacular media—films, video games, and graphic novels—the future is
presented as post-catastrophic. Nature has taken some revenge that
makes conventional politics seem irrelevant, reducing society to struggle
and rescue. The earth’s surface grows wild, humans go feral, and
anything is possible.
Hitler the thinker was wrong that politics and science are the same
thing. Hitler the politician was right that conflating them creates a
rapturous sense of catastrophic time and thus the potential for radical
action. When an apocalypse is on the horizon, waiting for scientific
solutions seems senseless, struggle seems natural, and demagogues of

blood and soil come to the fore. A sound policy for our world, then, would
be one that keeps the fear of planetary catastrophe as far away as
possible. This means accepting the autonomy of science from politics,
and making the political choice to support the pertinent kinds of science
that will allow conventional politics to proceed.
—
The planet is changing in ways that might make Hitlerian descriptions of
life, space, and time more plausible. The expected increase of average
global temperatures by four degrees Celsius this century would transform
human life on much of the globe. Climate change is unpredictable, which
exacerbates the problem. Present trends can mislead, since feedback
effects await. If ice sheets collapse, heat from the sun will be absorbed by
seawater rather than reflected back into space. If the Siberian tundra
melts, methane will rise from the earth, trapping heat in the atmosphere.
If the Amazon basin is stripped of jungle, it will release a massive pulse of
carbon dioxide. Global processes are always experienced locally, and local
factors can either restrain or amplify them. The coasts are likely to flood,
but where and when is impossible to say. Half of the world’s cities are
threatened, but which one will be lost first cannot be known. Its end will
not come in one huge wave, but after countless cumulative breaches. No
individual storm will be subject to prediction more than a few days in
advance. Each will be unique, and yet each will belong to a cumulative
trend.
Perhaps the experience of unprecedented storms or relentless droughts
will jar expectations about the security of basic resources and make
Hitlerian politics more resonant. As Hitler demonstrated during the
Great Depression, humans are able to portray a looming crisis in such a
way as to justify drastic measures in the present. Under enough stress, or
with enough skill, politicians can effect the conflations Hitler pioneered:
between nature and politics, between ecosystem and household, between
need and desire. A global problem that seems otherwise insoluble can be
blamed upon a specific group of human beings.
Hitler was a child of the first globalization, which arose under imperial
auspices at the end of the nineteenth century. We are the children of the
second, that of the late twentieth century. Globalization is neither a

problem nor a solution; it is a condition with a history. It brings a specific
intellectual danger. People have no choice but to think on a planetary
scale—as Hitler and Carl Schmitt never tired of emphasizing. Since the
world is more complex than a country or a city, the temptation is all the
greater to find some master key to understanding everything. When a
global order collapses, as was the experience of many Europeans in the
second, third, and fourth decades of the twentieth century, a simplistic
diagnosis such as Hitler’s can seem to clarify the global by referring to the
ecological, the supernatural, or the conspiratorial. When the normal rules
seem to have been broken and expectations have been shattered, a
suspicion can be burnished that someone (the Jews, for example) has
somehow diverted nature from its proper course. A problem that is truly
planetary in scale, such as climate change, obviously demands global
solutions—and one apparent solution is to define a global enemy.
The Holocaust was different from other episodes of mass killing or
ethnic cleansing because German policy aimed for the murder of every
Jewish child, woman, and man. This was only thinkable because the Jews
were understood as the makers and enforcers of a corrupt planetary
order. Jews can again be seen as a universal threat, as indeed they already
are by increasingly important political formations in Europe, Russia, and
the Middle East. So might Muslims, gays, or other groups that can be
associated with changes on a worldwide scale.
—
Climate change as a local problem can produce local conflicts; climate
change as a global crisis might generate the demand for global victims.
Over the past two decades, the continent of Africa has provided some
indications of what these local conflicts will be like, and hints about how
they might become global. It is a continent of weak states. In conditions
of state collapse, droughts can bring hundreds of thousands of deaths
from starvation, as in Somalia in 2010. Climate change can also increase
the likelihood that Africans will find ideological reasons to kill other
Africans in times of apparent shortage. In the future, Africa might also
become the site of a global competition for food, perhaps with
accompanying global ideological justifications.
Africa was a part of Germany’s colonial past when Hitler came to

power. The conquest of Africa was the final stage of the first globalization,
at the time of Hitler’s childhood. It was in sub-Saharan Africa that
Germans and other Europeans relearned their lessons of race. Rwanda is
an artifact of Europe’s scramble for Africa in general and of German East
Africa in particular. The division of its population into Hutu and Tutsi
clans was the typical European method of rule: to favor one group in
order to govern another. It made no more and no less sense than the idea
that Poles and Ukrainians belonged to a different race than Germans, or
that Slavs should be recruited from starvation camps in order to aid in
the killing of Jews. Today’s Africans can and do apply racial divisions and
fantasies to one another, just as Europeans did to Africans in the 1880s
and 1890s and Europeans did to Europeans in the 1930s and 1940s.
Mass killing in Rwanda provides an example of a political response to
ecological crisis on a national scale. The exhaustion of the country’s
arable land in the late 1980s was followed by an absolute decline in crop
yields in 1993. The government recognized overpopulation as a problem
and was accordingly seeking ways to export its own people to neighboring
countries. It faced a political rival associated with the Tutsis whose
invasion plans involved the redistribution of precious farms. The
government’s policy of encouraging Hutus to kill Tutsis in spring 1994
was most successful where there were land shortages. People who wanted
land denounced their neighbors. Perpetrators said that they were
motivated by the desire to seize land and by the fear that others would do
so before them. During the campaign of killing, Hutus did indeed kill
Tutsis, but when no Tutsis were available Hutus also killed other Hutus—
and took their land. Because Tutsis had been favored by the colonial
powers, Hutus who killed them could cloak themselves in a myth of
colonial liberation. Between April and July 1994, at least half a million
people were murdered.
The starvation in Somalia and the mass killing in Rwanda are dreadful
suggestions of what climate change might bring to Africa. The first
exemplifies death brought directly by climate, and the second, racial
conflict brought by the interaction of climate and political creativity. The
future might hold the third and most fearsome possibility: an interaction
between local scarcity and a colonial power capable of extracting food
while exporting global ideology. Even as Africans themselves struggle for
access to arable soil and potable water, their continent presents itself as

the solution to the food security problems of Asians. The combination of
weak property rights, corrupt regimes, and one half of the world’s
untilled soil has placed Africa at the center of Asian food security
planning. The United Arab Emirates and South Korea have tried to
control large swathes of Sudan. They have been joined by Japan, Qatar,
and Saudi Arabia in consistent efforts to buy or lease agrarian terrain in
Africa. A South Korean company has tried to lease half of Madagascar.
—
One Asian country exhibits a unique combination of enormous need for
food and a commensurate ability to pursue resources: the People’s
Republic of China. China is a rising industrial and exporting power that
cannot from its own territory ensure the basic supplies needed for the
expanding prosperity that its population takes for granted. In some
respects, China might be in a worse position now than Germany was in
the 1930s. Its supply of arable soil per person is about forty percent of the
world average, and is diminishing at a rate of about a million hectares per
year. The Chinese people have experienced mass hunger. The Second
World War and the succeeding civil war in China brought starvation to
millions of people. A decade after the victory of the communists, the
famine caused by Mao’s Great Leap Forward of 1958–1962 killed tens of
millions of people.
In twenty-first-century China, the gap between the two senses of the
word Lebensraum—comfort and survival—appears to be small. There are
tens of millions of prosperous Chinese today whose family members died
of starvation in living memory. The Chinese populace will likely require
more and more calories because prosperous Chinese, like prosperous
people everywhere, demand greater food security as well as more and
different kinds of food. The same Chinese communist party that starved
its own people during its revolutionary phase still rules the country. Since
it is responsible both for past famine and for future plenty, it is hugely
sensitive to food supplies. This can be seen in the market-distorting
purchases of agricultural commodities whenever global supply seems
threatened. It is improbable that China, given its growing wealth, will
actually run out of food. Much more likely are overreactions to
momentary anxieties that punish peoples beyond China. Regardless of

whether large numbers of Chinese are actually threatened with physical
hunger, the politics of national prosperity will tend towards decisive
international action when a sense of threat emerges.
Facing some future crisis, perhaps a series of annual droughts, leaders
in Beijing might draw the conclusion in the 2030s that leaders in Berlin
drew in the 1930s: that the globalization that serves a booming export
sector must be complemented by durable control of living space that
ensures food supplies. The Chinese leadership has described Africa as a
source of needed resources, including food. Chinese authorities
demonstrated during the climate-related civil war that began in Sudan in
2003 that they would support mass murderers when doing so seemed to
serve their investments. In Sudan, drought drove Arabs southward into
the lands of African pastoralists. The Sudanese government sided with
the Arabs and designed a policy to eliminate the Zaghawa, Masseleit, and
Fur peoples as such. This Sudanese government was armed by China and
Russia.
China also faces a shortage that was unheard of in the 1930s: potable
water. Climate change seems to intensify the water cycle, bringing more
droughts as well as more floods. Places that are drenched are getting
more water; places that are parched are getting less. Close to a billion
people worldwide lack the half gallon a day needed for drinking, and
more than two billion lack the five gallons a day needed for hygiene. In
the twenty-first century, people have rioted for water not only in China
but in Bolivia, India, Kenya, Pakistan, Somalia, and Sudan. China
disposes of only about a third as much freshwater per person as the
global average, and much of it comes from glaciers that are melting away
in the warming air. Half of Chinese freshwater and about twenty percent
of Chinese groundwater are already polluted beyond potability. By 2030,
Chinese demand for water will likely be close to twice the current supply.
It is quite possible, of course, that China, or at least its more prosperous
citizens, will be able to afford desalination of seawater in the future as
technology improves.
Less peaceful approaches to the problem of uncertain water and food
supplies are also possible. China has a long border with a country that has
considerable supplies of water: the Russian Federation. Chinese farmers
are cultivating the land on their side of the Chinese-Russian border ever
more intensively, Russian farmers ever less so. In the early twenty-first

century, Beijing invested more capital in eastern Russia than did
Moscow. As time passes, Beijing might look to Siberian water, just as it
now looks to Siberian natural gas and oil. Beijing’s preferred method of
control, in Russia as in Africa, has been legal contracts on terms
advantageous to itself. Russian leaders, like African ones, have been
amenable to this form of submission. This Chinese approach to Moscow
has worked with natural gas, and it might work with water.
Yet as climate change continues, and as unpredictable events
accumulate, land in Africa and Russia might seem more precious to
Africans and Russians themselves. Under pressure, the Chinese will
perhaps find the ideas that seem to justify the impoverishment and death
of Africans and Russians. Or perhaps Russians and Africans will find the
ideas that justify putting an end to Chinese globalization and to the
people who seem to be behind it.
None of these Chinese scenarios is inevitable. China’s preoccupations
resemble those of interwar Germany, but Chinese leaders do not exhibit
Hitler’s unusual opposition to scientific solutions. Whereas Hitler
opposed the agricultural science that eventually resolved any sense of
ecological panic in Germany, Chinese authorities fund the energy
research that could slow climate change and thus lessen concern about
food and water. Beijing has invested in solar, wind, fission, and fusion
energy, and has committed itself to reaching voluntary targets for
greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. Because it imports rather than
exports natural gas and oil, China has no powerful domestic
constituencies that oppose alternative forms of energy. China is a
contributor to climate change and might find itself involved in Africa and
Russia as climate change continues. At the same time, Chinese engineers
are also developing and implementing technical solutions that slow
climate change, thereby reducing the risk of these and other possible
future conflicts.
—
Russian governments of the early twenty-first century, by contrast, have
based their budgets and staked their popular support on the export of
hydrocarbons to Europe and China. Because Russian governments seek
to maintain demand for natural gas and oil in these great neighboring

markets, they have indirectly committed themselves to a future of carbon
pollution and climate change. Perhaps relatedly, the sense of coming
catastrophe has been more evident in Russian culture than in China or in
the West. Gifted Russian thinkers, novelists, artists, and filmmakers have
presented diverse and arresting images of human decadence and
downfall. Like a century ago, when Russia was riven by revolution and
counterrevolution, the Russian political class surpasses any of its
neighbors in formulating and transmitting catastrophist ideology.
In a new Russian colonialism that began in 2013, Russian leaders and
propagandists imagined neighboring Ukrainians out of existence or
presented them as sub-Russians. In characterizations that recall what
Hitler said about Ukrainians (and Russians), Russian leaders described
Ukraine as an artificial entity with no history, culture, and language,
backed by some global agglomeration of Jews, gays, Europeans, and
Americans. In the Russian war against Ukraine that this rhetoric was
meant to justify, the first gains were the natural gas fields in the Black Sea
near the Crimean Peninsula, which Russia invaded and annexed in 2014.
The fertile soil of mainland Ukraine, its black earth, makes it a very
important exporter of food, which Russia is not.
President Vladimir Putin of Russia developed a foreign policy doctrine
of ethnic war. This argument from language to invasion, whether pressed
in Czechoslovakia by Hitler or in Ukraine by Putin, undoes the logics of
sovereignty and rights and prepares the ground for the destruction of
states. It transforms recognized polities into targets of willful aggression,
and individuals into ethnic objects whose putative interests are
determined from abroad. Putin also placed himself at the head of
populist, fascist, and neo-Nazi forces in Europe. While supporting
politicians who blame global Jews for planetary problems and applying
techniques of state destruction, Moscow generated a new global
scapegoat—the homosexuals. The new Russian idea of a “gay lobby”
responsible for the decadence of the world makes no more sense than the
old Nazi idea of a “Jewish lobby” responsible for the same, but such an
ideology is now at large in the world.
As Russia demonstrated, the Second World War can shift quickly from
being a cautionary tale to an instructive precedent. In 1939, Stalin made
an alliance with Hitler, that is, with the European Far Right of the time,
on the logic that doing so would cause Europe to destroy itself. Stalin

imagined that Germany and its western neighbors would then clash and
that their power would dissolve. Putin seems to have made a similar
calculation. Just as the purpose of alliance with Hitler in 1939 was
supposed to turn the most radical force in Europe against Europe itself,
so Russian support of the European Far Right is meant to disrupt and
disintegrate the most peaceful and prosperous order of the early twentyfirst century—the European Union. In 2014 and 2015, Putin rehabilitated
the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, the agreement between Nazi Germany and
the Soviet Union that began the Second World War and created some of
the preconditions for the Holocaust.
—
Africa demonstrates the risks of local shortages, China suggests the
problems of global power and national anxiety, and Russia shows how
practices of the 1930s can come to seem like positive examples. Thanks in
large measure to Moscow, state destruction and the construction of
planetary enemies have returned to vogue in Europe. In the Middle East,
states tend to be weak, and Islamic fundamentalists have long presented
Jews, Americans, and Europeans as planetary enemies. The Russian antigay campaign, which associates European and American power with the
hidden hand of the gay international, was targeted to the Muslim world
as well as to domestic constituencies.
These forms of counterglobal thinking increase the possibility that
particular groups can be blamed for planetary phenomena. In large parts
of the world, hundreds of millions of Muslims are likely to face, as a result
of climate change, a collapse of possibilities for life that will have no local
explanation. Places that contribute almost nothing to climate change are
battered by its consequences. Bangladesh, a Muslim country with half the
population of the United States, is wracked by storms and floods
exacerbated by the rising seas. In Libya, by contrast, the annual drought
is expected to lengthen from one hundred to two hundred days. The
people of Egypt depend upon the Nile, which runs four thousand miles
through desert before it reaches Cairo. Forces beyond the control of
Egyptians have made ours a planet where the Nile can run dry.
It is already the case that North African Muslims bring antisemitic
beliefs to Europe. But what if such Muslims in North Africa and the

Middle East actually blamed Jews for environmental disasters? In
Exodus 4:9, a text shared by Muslim, Jewish, and Christian traditions,
God warns that “the water which thou takest out of the river shall become
blood upon the dry land.” The Jews who live in the Middle East, citizens
of Israel, might be at risk in a time of water shortages. One element of the
struggle for control of the West Bank and the Golan Heights is concern
about water supplies. Israelis drink from aquifers under the occupied
territories. Although Israel has the military and technological capacity to
protect its population from the consequences of climate change, the
continuing desertification of the Middle East might generate both
regional conflict and the demand for scapegoats. In a Middle Eastern war
for resources, Muslims might blame Jews for both local problems and the
general ecological crisis; that was, after all, Hitler’s approach. Naturally,
Israelis could also blame Muslims and seek to draw their American allies
into a larger conflict.
—
Zionists of all orientations were correct to believe that statehood was
crucial to future national existence. The destruction of European states in
the 1930s was a precondition to all of the major Nazi crimes, including
the Holocaust itself. Most Zionists of the Left and Center believed that a
state of Israel could be established by some arrangement of international
law. This proved to be correct, but only after the perpetration of the
Holocaust. The Revisionist Zionists of the Far Right were correct in
fearing an imminent catastrophe in the 1930s and reasoned that covert
cooperation with the Polish state was therefore justified.
Since 1977, when Menachem Begin came to power in Israel, national
terrorism has moved closer to the center of Israeli national myth. What
the glorious retellings of the history of Irgun and Lehi often omit is the
Polish connection. The careers of Irgun’s commander Begin and Lehi’s
leaders Avraham Stern and Yitzhak Shamir are inconceivable without
their Polish background and backers. After Begin, Shamir would serve as
prime minister from 1983 to 1984 and then again from 1986 to 1992.
Other comrades in arms and Polish clients resurfaced in positions of
authority. Eliahu Meridor, once trained in the tactics of terrorism by the
Poles, would be elected to the Israeli parliament three times. Lankin, also

trained by the Poles, would be Israel’s ambassador in South Africa. Their
political tradition, Likud, was the extension of the Revisionist Zionism
that had flourished under the protection of the Polish state in the second
half of the 1930s. The Polish connection might seem to have been broken
with the rise of Benjamin Netanyahu, the first Israeli prime minister born
in Israel and the first from Likud who is not a native speaker of Polish.
Netanyahu speaks American English instead, in line with his own
education and with Israel’s present geopolitical affiliation. Yet even here
the link to Polish policy is strong: During the high tide of cooperation
with Poland, Netanyahu’s father was the private secretary to Vladimir
Jabotinsky, the founder of Revisionist Zionism.
The ambivalence of interwar Polish support for Revisionist Zionists
suggests a similar tension within American support for an Israel
governed by their successors. In the late 1930s, Polish leaders and much
of the Polish population were pro-Zionist because they wanted Jews to
leave Poland during an economic crisis. Some Americans of the early
twenty-first century are pro-Israel because they want Jews in the Holy
Land during the coming apocalypse. The United States of today
resembles Poland in the 1930s in the sense that more Christians are
active supporters of the Zionist idea than are Jews. Some of Israel’s
American political allies—evangelical Christians—tend to deny the reality
of climate change while supporting hydrocarbon policies that accelerate
it. Among these American evangelicals are millions of dispensationalists,
who support Israel because they believe that disasters there herald the
second coming of Jesus Christ. In the 1940s, dispensationalists
maintained that the Holocaust was the work of God because it forced
Jews to reconsider their errors and move to the Promised Land. Although
such a sharp substitution of politics by apocalypse is a minority view, a
displacement of the political history of the State of Israel within a story of
the end times is common in American society.
As prime minister of Israel, Begin sought and found alliances with
American evangelicals beginning in 1977, about forty years after he had
made contact with Polish officials. In the 1930s, Revisionists such as
Begin, Stern, and Shamir made the case, entirely correctly, that Jews
needed state protection. Their Polish patrons supported the ideas of a
state of Israel in an attempt to defuse economic crisis and mass
antisemitism. The irony that confronts their successors, the second

generation of Revisionist Zionists who now rule Israel, is perhaps more
vexing. Some of their American patrons support policies that could
hasten a catastrophe that would endanger the State of Israel, whose
destruction they see as a stage in the redemption of the world. Zionists
were correct that statehood protects Jews, but their allies can be people
who see Israel as a means to some other end.
—
Americans, when they think about the Holocaust at all, take for granted
that they could never commit such a crime. The U.S. Army, after all, was
on the right side of the Second World War. The historical reality is
somewhat more complicated. Franklin D. Roosevelt sent racially
segregated armed forces to liberate Europe. Antisemitism was prominent
in the United States at the time. The Holocaust was largely over by the
time American soldiers landed in Normandy. Although they liberated
some concentration camps, American troops reached none of the major
killing sites of the Holocaust and saw none of the hundreds of death pits
of the East. The American trial of guards at the Mauthausen
concentration camp, like the British trial at Bergen-Belsen, reattributed
prewar citizenship to the Jewish victims. This helped later generations to
overlook the basic fact that denial of citizenship, usually by the
destruction of states, was what permitted the mass murder of Jews.
A misunderstanding about the relationship between state authority and
mass killing underlay an American myth of the Holocaust that prevailed
in the early twenty-first century: that the United States was a country that
intentionally rescued people from the genocides caused by overweening
states. Following this reasoning, the destruction of a state could be
associated with rescue rather than risk. To be sure, the United States
contributed to the destruction of regimes in Germany and Japan in 1945.
But it also undertook to rebuild state structures. One of the errors of the
2003 invasion of Iraq was the belief that regime change must be creative.
The theory was that the destruction of a state and its ruling elite would
bring freedom and justice. In fact, the succession of events precipitated
by the illegal American invasion of a sovereign state confirmed one of the
unlearned lessons of the history of the Second World War.
Mass killings generally take place during civil wars or regime changes.

It was the deliberate policy of Nazi Germany to artificially create
conditions of state destruction and then steer the consequences towards
Jews. Destroying states without such malign intentions produces more
conventional disasters. The invasion of Iraq killed at least as many people
as did the prior Iraqi regime. It exposed the members of the Iraqi ruling
party to religious cleansing and prepared the way for chaos throughout
the country. The American invaders eventually sided with the political
clan they had initially defeated, so desperate were they to restore order.
This permitted a troop withdrawal, which was then followed by Islamist
uprisings. The destruction of the Iraqi state in 2003 and the political
disturbances brought by the hot summer of 2010 created the space for
the terrorists of the Islamic State in 2014.
A common American error is to believe that freedom is the absence of
state authority. The genealogy of this confusion leads us back to the
Germany and the Austria of the 1930s.
—
The dominant stereotype of Nazi Germany is of an all-powerful state that
catalogued, repressed, and then exterminated an entire class of its own
citizens. This was not how the Nazis achieved the Holocaust, nor how
they even thought about it. The enormous majority of the victims of the
Holocaust were not German citizens; Jews who were German citizens
were much more likely to survive than Jews who were citizens of states
that the Germans destroyed. The Nazis knew that they had to go abroad
and lay waste to neighboring societies before they could hope to bring
their revolution to their own. Had Hitler been assassinated in 1939, as he
almost was, Nazi Germany would likely be remembered as one fascist
state among others. Not only the Holocaust, but all major German crimes
took place in areas where state institutions had been destroyed,
dismantled, or seriously compromised. The German murder of five and a
half million Jews, more than three million Soviet prisoners of war, and
about a million civilians in so-called anti-partisan operations all took
place in stateless zones.
Since the Holocaust is an axial event of modern history, its
misunderstanding turns our minds in the wrong direction. When the
Holocaust is blamed on the modern state, the weakening of state

authority appears salutary. On the political Right, the erosion of state
power by international capitalism seems natural; on the political Left,
rudderless revolutions portray themselves as virtuous. In the twenty-first
century, anarchical protest movements join in a friendly tussle with
global oligarchy, in which neither side can be hurt since both see the real
enemy as the state. Both the Left and the Right tend to fear order rather
than its destruction or absence. The common ideological reflex has been
postmodernity: a preference for the small over the large, the fragment
over the structure, the glimpse over the view, the feeling over the fact. On
both the Left and the Right, postmodern explanations of the Holocaust
tend to follow German and Austrian traditions of the 1930s. As a result,
they generate errors that can make future crimes more rather than less
likely.
On the Left, the dominant current of interpretation of the Holocaust
can be called the Frankfurt School. The members of the group known by
this name, largely German Jews who immigrated to the United States,
portrayed the Nazi state as an expression of overgrown modernity.
Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer, in their influential Dialectic of
Enlightenment, began (as did Hitler) from the premise that “bourgeois
civilization” was about to collapse. They reduced scientific method to
practical mastery, failing (as did Hitler) to grasp the reflective and
unpredictable character of scientific investigation. Whereas Hitler
presented the Jews as the creators of bogus universalisms that served as
façades for Jewish mastery, Adorno and Horkheimer opposed all
universalisms as façades for mastery in general. The murder of Jews, they
claimed, was just one instance of the general intolerance for variety that
was inherent in attempts to inform politics with reason. It is hard to
overstate the depth and significance of this error. Hitler was not a
supporter of the Enlightenment but its enemy. He did not champion
science but conflated nature with politics.
On the Right, the dominant explanation of the Holocaust can be called
the Vienna School. Followers of the Austrian economist Friedrich von
Hayek claim that the overweening welfare state led to National Socialism,
and thus prescribe deregulation and privatization as the cure for political
evil. This narrative, though convenient, is historically indefensible. There
has never been a democratic state that built a social welfare system and
then succumbed to fascism (or communism) as a result. What happened

in central Europe was rather the opposite. Hitler came to power during a
Great Depression which had spread around the world precisely because
governments did not yet know how to intervene in the business cycle.
Hayek’s homeland Austria practiced capitalism according to the freemarket orthodoxies of the time, with the consequence that the downturn
was awful and seemingly endless. The oppression of Austrian Jews began
not as the state grew, but as it collapsed in 1938.
The ideal capitalism envisioned by advocates of the free market
depends upon social virtues and wise policies that it does not itself
generate. In the particular form of capitalism generated by German policy
and experienced by Jews and their rescuers during the Holocaust, every
exchange depended upon personal trust, in the sense that the other party
in the arrangement could betray and kill. In an extreme version of market
utopianism, which Hayek himself opposed, the Vienna School merges
with the thought of Ayn Rand. She believed that competition was the
meaning of life itself; Hitler said much the same thing. Such
reductionism, although temptingly elegant, is fatal. If nothing matters but
competition, then it is natural to eliminate people who resist it and
institutions that prevent it. For Hitler, those people were Jews and those
institutions were states.
As all economists know, markets do not function perfectly at either the
macro or the micro level. At the macro level, unregulated capitalism is
subject to the extremes of the business cycle. In theory, markets always
recover from depression; in practice, the human suffering induced by
economic collapse can have profound political consequences, including
the end of capitalism itself, before any recovery takes place. At the micro
level, firms in theory provide goods that are desired and affordable. In
practice, companies seeking profits can generate external costs that they
do not themselves remediate. The classical example of such an externality
is pollution, which costs its producers nothing but harms other people.
A government can assign a cost to pollution, which internalizes the
externality and thus reduces the undesired consequence. It would be
simple to internalize the costs of the carbon pollution that causes climate
change. It requires a dogma to oppose such an operation, which depends
upon markets and in the long run will preserve them, as anticapitalist. On
the American secular right, some supporters of the unrestrained free
market have found that dogma: the claim that science is nothing more

than politics. Since the science of climate change is clear, some American
conservatives and libertarians deny the validity of science itself by
presenting its findings as a cover for conniving politicians. This is a
merger of science and politics—quite possibly a dangerous one.
Though no American would deny that tanks work in the desert, some
Americans do deny that deserts are growing larger. Though no American
would deny ballistics, some Americans do deny climate science. Hitler
denied that science could solve the basic problem of nutrition, but
assumed that technology could win territory. It seemed to follow that
waiting for research was pointless and that immediate military action was
necessary. In the case of climate change, the denial of science likewise
legitimates military action rather than investment in technology. If
people do not take responsibility for the climate themselves, they will
shift responsibility for the associated calamities to other people. Insofar
as climate denial hinders technical progress, it might hasten real
disasters, which in their turn can make catastrophic thinking still more
credible. A vicious circle can begin in which politics collapses into
ecological panic.
The popular notion that free markets are natural is also a merger of
science and politics. The market is not nature; it depends upon nature.
The climate is not a commodity that can be traded but rather a
precondition to economic activity as such. The claim of a “right” to
destroy the world in the name of profits for a few people reveals an
important conceptual problem. Rights mean restraint. Each person is an
end in himself or herself; the significance of a person is not exhausted by
what someone else wants from him or her. Individuals have the right not
to be defined as parts of a planetary conspiracy or a doomed race. They
have the right not to have their homelands defined as habitat. They have
the right not to have their polities destroyed.
When states are absent, rights—by any definition—are impossible to
sustain. States are not structures to be taken for granted, exploited, or
discarded, but are fruits of long and quiet effort. It is tempting but
dangerous to gleefully fragment the state from the Right or knowingly
gaze at the shards from the Left. Political thought is neither destruction
nor critique, but rather the historically informed imagination of plural
structures—a labor of the present that can preserve life and decency in
the future. One plurality is between politics and science. A recognition of

their distinct purposes makes possible thinking about rights and states;
their conflation is a step toward a total ideology such as National
Socialism. Another plurality is between order and freedom: each depends
upon the other, although each is different from the other. The claim that
order is freedom or that freedom is order ends in tyranny. The claim that
freedom is the lack of order must end in anarchy—which is nothing more
than tyranny of a special kind. The point of politics is to keep multiple
and irreducible goods in play, rather than yielding to some dream, Nazi
or otherwise, of totality.
—
Gustaw Herling-Grudziński, who endured Stalin’s Gulag while his
brother was sheltering Jews, wrote that “a man can be human only under
human conditions.” The purpose of the state is to preserve these
conditions, so that its citizens need not see personal survival as their only
goal. The state is for the recognition, endorsement, and protection of
rights, which means creating the conditions under which rights can be
recognized, endorsed, and protected. The state endures to create a sense
of durability.
A final plurality thus has to do with time. When we lack a sense of past
and future, the present feels like a shaky platform, an uncertain basis for
action. The defense of states and rights is impossible to undertake if no
one learns from the past or believes in the future. Awareness of history
permits recognition of ideological traps and generates skepticism about
demands for immediate action because everything has suddenly changed.
Confidence in the future can make the world seem like something more
than, in Hitler’s words, “the surface area of a precisely measured space.”
Time, the fourth dimension, can make the three dimensions of space
seem less claustrophobic. Confidence in duration is the antidote to panic
and the tonic of demagogy. A sense of the future has to be created in the
present from what we know of the past, the fourth dimension built out
from the three of daily life.
In the case of climate change, we know what the state can do to tame
panic and befriend time. We know that it is easier and less costly to draw
nourishment from plants than animals. We know that improvements in
agricultural productivity continue and that the desalination of seawater is

possible. We know that efficiency of energy use is the simplest way to
reduce the emission of greenhouse gases. We know that governments can
assign prices to carbon pollution and can pledge reductions of future
emissions to one another and review one another’s pledges. We also know
that governments can stimulate the development of appropriate energy
technologies. Solar and wind energy are ever cheaper. Fusion, advanced
fission, tidal stream power, and non-crop-based biofuels offer real hope
for a new energy economy. In the long run, we will need techniques to
capture and store carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. All of this is not
only thinkable but attainable.
States should invest in science so that the future can be calmly
contemplated. The study of the past suggests why this would be a wise
course. Time supports thought, thought supports time; structure
supports plurality, and plurality, structure. This line of reasoning is less
glamorous than waiting for general disaster and dreaming of personal
redemption. Effective prevention of mass killings is incremental and its
heroes are invisible. No conception of a durable state can compete with
visions of totality. No green politics will ever be as exciting as red blood
on black earth. But opposing evil requires inspiration by what is sound
rather than by what is resonant. The pluralities of nature and politics,
order and freedom, past and future, are not as intoxicating as the
totalitarian utopias of the last century. Every unity is beautiful as image
but circular as logic and tyrannical as politics. The answer to those who
seek totality is not anarchy, which is not totality’s enemy but its
handmaiden. The answer is thoughtful, plural institutions: an unending
labor of differentiated creation. This is a matter of imagination, maturity,
and survival.
We share Hitler’s planet and several of his preoccupations; we have
changed less than we think. We like our living space, we fantasize about
destroying governments, we denigrate science, we dream of catastrophe.
If we think that we are victims of some planetary conspiracy, we edge
towards Hitler. If we believe that the Holocaust was a result of the
inherent characteristics of Jews, Germans, Poles, Lithuanians,
Ukrainians, or anyone else, then we are moving in Hitler’s world.
—

Understanding the Holocaust is our chance, perhaps our last one, to
preserve humanity. That is not enough for its victims. No accumulation of
good, no matter how vast, undoes an evil; no rescue of the future, no
matter how successful, undoes a murder in the past. Perhaps it is true
that to save one life is to save the world. But the converse is not true:
saving the world does not restore a single lost life.
The family tree of that boy in Vienna, like that of all of the Jewish
children born and unborn, has been sheared at the roots: “I the root was
once the flower / under these dim tons my bower / comes the shearing of
the thread / death saw wailing overhead.” The evil that was done to the
Jews—to each Jewish child, woman, and man—cannot be undone. Yet it
can be recorded, and it can be understood. Indeed, it must be understood
so that its like can be prevented in the future.
That must be enough for us and for those who, let us hope, shall follow.

Acknowledgments

Wanda J., with the help of others, saved herself and her two sons. One of
them grew up in postwar communist Poland to become a historian. He
taught in the secret study circles that were known, by reference to a
tradition of the nineteenth century, as a Flying University. After martial
law was declared in Poland in 1981 he was interned in a camp. A decade
after that, after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, he agreed to be
one of my two doctoral supervisors. In that sense I owe my career as a
historian to the people who aided Wanda Grosmanowa-Jedlicka, to
Wanda Grosmanowa-Jedlicka herself, and to her younger son Jerzy
Jedlicki. In the quarter century in which I have had the good fortune of
making the study of eastern Europe a career, I have been instructed by
several other people who survived the Holocaust. Among my colleagues
are people who owe their lives to rescuers mentioned here, such as
Sugihara, and among my students people descended from people saved
by others, such as Sheptyts’kyi. It would be absurdly conceited to describe
these encounters as a personal debt; I acknowledge them as a source of
this book. History goes on, for better and for worse; the pale light of each
rescue refracts down the mirrored passages of the generations.
—
Much of this book was written in Vienna and in the northeast of Poland:
two places where some of the most notorious oppression of Jews took
place, the discussion of which has produced outstanding histories that
have preceded and informed my own. The Institute for Human Sciences
(IWM) in Vienna is the special creation of my late friend, the philosopher
Krzysztof Michalski. Without his intellectual welcome and without the
support of his colleagues there, especially Ivan Krastev and Klaus Nellen,
I would not have undertaken this book nor seen it through to completion.
I am grateful to IWM fellows for a seminar devoted to this book and to

Dessislava Gavrilova, Izabela Kalinowska, and Shalini Randeria for their
friendship in Vienna. In the summers I was privileged to have been the
guest of Krzysztof Czyżewski and Małgorzata Szporer-Czyżewska and
their Borderlands Foundation in Krasnogruda, staying with my family in
a house that once belonged to the family of Czesław Miłosz. The
Borderlands Foundation does what so many humanists recommend: seek
and find ways to understand the other.
—
Some of the debts go back to the years just before I began this book.
Discussions of my book Bloodlands, a history of German and Soviet mass
killing on the lands where the Holocaust took place, helped me to ask
what I hope were some of the right questions about the origins of the
Final Solution. The books of Peter Longerich have been significant, in
that I am seeking to extend his case for politics to peoples beyond the
Germans and lands beyond Germany. Christoph Dieckmann’s study of
Lithuania has been exemplary in its unity of theoretical understanding
and regional knowledge. On the specific question of the psychic
consequences of the appearance and disappearance of state power, I have
been influenced for two decades by east European rereadings of Hannah
Arendt, in particular that of Jan Tomasz Gross. Several of the lines of
thought I pursue here were initiated in his books Revolution from
Abroad and Neighbors. For almost a quarter century, Andrzej
Waśkiewicz has challenged me to think more broadly about the category
of politics. While I was writing Bloodlands I was also helping my late
friend and colleague Tony Judt create a book of discussions called
Thinking the Twentieth Century. Those conversations in New York
helped me clarify some of the thinking about the state that figures in this
book.
Robert Silvers of The New York Review of Books edited and published
essays where I worked out certain ideas that feature in the middle
chapters. Timothy Garton Ash, one of my doctoral supervisors, discussed
structure and conclusions with me. Tina Bennett, now of WME and my
agent, befriended me as we began graduate school together at Oxford.
She was the first reader of this manuscript and its first editor; her
discernment and her enthusiasm were hugely appreciated. Tim Duggan,

my editor and publisher at Crown, took up the project with tremendous
skill, energy, and devotion. Thomas Gebremedhin handled the
manuscript superbly, and I appreciate the attention paid to this work by
the staff at Crown. I also thank Detlef Felken of C. H. Beck for
conversations between Bloodlands and Black Earth, Stuart Williams and
Jörg Hensgen of Bodley Head for their reading of the full text, and Pierre
Nora of Gallimard for his thoughts about tone and conclusion. My friends
and colleagues James Berger, Johann Chapoutot, Fabian Drixler, Rick
Duke, Susan Ferber, Janos Kovács, Hiroaki Kuromiya, Eric Lohr, Wendy
Lower, Istvan Rév, Berel Rodal, Joanne Rudof, Stuart Rachels, Jeffrey
Veidlinger, and Anton Weiss-Wendt were generous enough to comment
upon full drafts. David Brandenberger and Joshua Goodman each
commented on a chapter of this book. Andrea Böltke and Andy Morris
read the text with exemplary professional care. Jonathan Wyss of Beehive
Mapping added the indispensable visual element.
—
The arguments that appear here are also the fruit of the learning that
comes from listening to students. I taught draft chapters to a special
seminar at the London School of Economics in 2013–2014, and am
grateful to students there as well as to my colleague Arne Westad for
wonderful discussions. I learned a good deal from my students in History
987 at Yale University in 2012; a late draft of this manuscript was read by
the students of History 683 in 2015. Graduate students at Yale have been
my intellectual companions. While I was thinking about this book, Yedida
Kanfer finished a doctoral dissertation on religion and society in Łódź,
and while I was writing, Jadwiga Biskupska completed one on the
German occupation of Warsaw. David Petruccelli has helped me to think
about transnational history and Katherine Younger about church and
state. Jermaine Lloyd kept me thinking about race as a category of
transnational history. Sara Silverstein, whose dissertation bears on the
relationship between rights and the state, provided thoughtful comments.
I have also learned from Rachel White, whose subject is French
Christians and political resistance. Aner Barzilai and Stefan Eich
intervened with useful suggestions.
I am grateful to Naomi Lamoreaux, the superb chair of Yale’s history

department, as well as to Ian Shapiro and the MacMillan Center and Jim
Levinsohn of the Jackson Institute for Global Affairs. Adam Tooze led
two discussions of early chapters at Yale. I have been very fortunate to
spend my career at an institution so devoted to the humanities in general
and to history in particular, and where Jewish, German, and Slavic
history are broadly represented in teaching, research, and library
collections. I cannot stress enough the importance of the open stacks of
the Sterling Library, the support of librarians at Yale, and the special
resource that is the Fortunoff Video Archive for Holocaust Testimonies.
New Haven has been my home over the years because my old and true
friends Daniel Markovits, Sarah Bilston, Stefanie Markovits, and Ben
Polak live there.
—
The arguments have also benefited from public presentation. I was
fortunate to have been able to discuss this book at a René Girard Lecture
at Stanford University, at a Philippe Roman Lecture at the LSE, at a 1939
Club Lecture at UCLA, and at the Graduate Institute in Geneva, at
Sheffield University, the University of Edinburgh, St. Andrew’s
University, Birkbeck College London, University College London, the
University of Oxford, Cambridge University, City College of New York,
Princeton University, Georgetown University, Emory University, the
Institute for Social Research at Hamburg, the Sorbonne, the Conrad
Festival in Cracow, and at an Arendt Prize seminar at Bremen. Leon
Wieseltier had an idea that took me to Ukraine at an important moment.
—
The arguments here rest upon the broad learning of countless colleagues
in history and other disciplines, and in some measure upon my own
research. In the early sections on Hitler’s thought I returned to the
primary sources, above all Hitler’s own writings and speeches, in order to
elucidate certain basic logics as clearly as possible. The intellectual debts
that enabled such an attempt are too broad to be recorded, either here or
in the Notes, but include my studies with Mary Gluck and Leszek
Kołakowski as well as long encounters with Isaiah Berlin and Andrzej
Walicki. The sections of chapters 2 and 3 on interwar Polish policy, and

the sections of chapters 9, 10, 11, and 12 that discuss individual rescue,
rest heavily on archival materials. The documentary evidence of rescue is
largely in Russian, Polish, and Yiddish; I have been at pains these last few
years to read as much of this material as possible. Generalizations, of
course, are quite difficult. I have done my best to make sure that the
claims about rescue are based on what Jews themselves said, with a
preference for languages they knew at the time, and for dates as close as
possible to the events recalled. As with many aspects of the history of the
Holocaust, there remain large untapped reserves of primary materials in
these east European languages. Jeffrey Burds, Wójtek Rappak, and
Zbyszek Stańczyk generously shared archival documents that are cited
here. Tess Davidson, Karolina Jesień, Andrew Koss, Julie Leighton, Olga
Litvin, and Adam Zadrożny all helped me to find sources. The
responsibility for this text is mine.
—
Although this is not a book about science, I do make certain claims about
the relationship between science and politics. Insofar as I have made
sense of these connections I owe a debt to practicing scientists, especially
my friends Matthew Albert, Olivia Judson, and Carlo Maley, my cousin
Steven Snyder, and my brother Philip Snyder. My brother Michael
Snyder, a student of Native American literature, has expanded my own
thinking about the global character of the history I aspire to recount in
this book. Throughout its writing I have been grateful for the love and
support of my sisters-in-law Lori Anderson Snyder and Mary Snyder and
have thought often of my nieces Cora and Ivy and nephews Benjamin and
Thomas. I would not be able to broach the metaphysical questions that
bound this history without my parents Estel Eugene Snyder and Christine
Hadley Snyder. I think also upon my grandparents and greatgrandparents, to whom I owe what understanding I have of living from
the land. As I wrote in the hills of Podlasie I thought of the hills of Ohio.
—
Mira, lily of the valleys. Marci Shore understands much of this subject
better than I. She knows languages, sources, shadows that do not flee
away. Her translation of The Black Seasons demonstrates what can be

said about this history in English. Her historical writing on ideas is for me
exemplary, and the philosophical questions posed here are ones that she
keeps alive in my mind. I thank her for her loving-kindness: to me, and
before all and after all to Kalev and Talia.

Notes

Introduction: Hitler’s World
Nothing can be known Space: Second Book, 8. “Innere abgeschlossenheit” and desire of nature
for races to separate: Mein Kampf, 281–82. See Chapoutot, Le nazisme, 428; Chapoutot, “Les
Nazis et la ‘Nature,’ ” 31. The American consul general Raymond Geist was right to speak of an
antisemitic “cosmology”: Husson, Heydrich, 121. The argument of this book proceeds from an
idea of a planetary Jewish threat to the enabling condition of statelessness by way of the new
forms of politics that united the antisemitic idea and the anti-political condition. Sémelin (in
Purifier, 135) is right that the history of mass killing must be international. But in the special case
of the Holocaust, it seems important first to define how its originator understood the planet.
Hitler’s scheme of international relations was derivative of his ecology. The ideas do seem to have
been fundamentally constant; as Kershaw writes, “Hitler retained at the core an extraordinary
inner consistency.” End, 281. Burrin speaks similarly of “la consistence et la continuité étonnantes
que manifesta cette vision du monde.” Hitler et les Juifs, 19.
In Hitler’s world For English and French thinkers such as Hobbes and Rousseau, an imaginary
state of nature is a literary device to enable us to consider human choices about power. We are to
imagine, as an exercise, what life must have been like before humans came together to make rules.
Then we should think our way through to the structures we actually desire. Hitler’s understanding
of nature also had little to do with German traditions of thought. For Kant, perfect knowledge of
an external natural world is unattainable, and wisdom consists in striving towards it in full
awareness of our limitations. For Hegel, the state of nature was a barbaric stage of prehistory that
gave way to institutions that man is constantly perfecting. According to Marx, nature is that which
surrounds us and resists us. We know it and ourselves insofar as we work to change it. On
Schmitt, see Zarka, Un détail, 7, 36. See also Neumann, Behemoth, 467.
“Nature knows,” wrote Hitler Quotation: Mein Kampf, 140. Charles Darwin did on one
occasion write that empire would eliminate “the savage races.” Descent of Man, 1:201. From
context it can be seen that his concerns in making this remark were far from political. Darwin, the
author of the powerful notion of evolution by natural selection, did not think that races were like
species; on the contrary, he held that all humans belonged to a single species capable of applying
reason and thereby selecting for survival on grounds other than the biological. See Tort, L’effet
Darwin, 75–80. I am distinguishing between Marx and Engels, his friend and popularizer, who
codified the “scientific” version of Marxism. On the long encounter of second-generation
Darwinism with second-generation Marxism, see Kołakowski, Main Currents, vol. 2, Golden Age.
Yet these liberals “Feige Völker”: Mein Kampf, 103. See Koonz, Nazi Conscience, 59. Cf.
Sternhell, Les anti-Lumière s, 666–67.
Hitler’s worldview dismissed Daily bread: Mein Kampf, 281; Second Book, 15, 74. See also
Hilberg, Destruction, 1:148. Riches of nature and commandment: Table Talk, 51, 141. One aim of
this presentation is to avoid a problem identified by Arendt: “the failure to take seriously what the
Nazis themselves said.” Origins, 3. See also Jureit, Das Ordnen von Räumen, 279.
Hitler exploited images Cf. White, “Historical Roots.”

Knowledge of the body See Engel, Holocaust, 15.
When paradise falls See Valentino, Final Solutions, 168, Jäckel, Hitler in History, 47. Cf.
Sarraute, L’ère du soupçon, 77, and Arendt, Origins, 242: “The hatred of the racists against the
Jews sprang from a superstitious apprehension that it might actually be the Jews, and not
themselves, whom God has chosen, to whom success was granted by divine providence.” On
wordview as faith, see Bärsch, Die politische Religion, 276–77.
Hitler’s presentation Mein Kampf, 73. This invocation of divine will, the last sentence of
chapter 2 of Mein Kampf, was cited by Carl Schmitt as he opened his conference on the struggle of
German jurisprudence against the Jewish spirit: “Eröffnung,” 14. Cf. the concept of “redemptive
antisemitism” in Friedländer, Years of Extermination.
Hitler saw the species “Unnatur”: Mein Kampf, 69. See also Mein Kampf, 287; Sämtliche
Aufzeichnungen, 462–63; Chapoutot, “La loi du sang,” 391; Poliakov, Sur les traces, 212, 217;
Bauman, Modernity, 68; Arendt, Origins, 202.
Hitler’s basic critique On Himmler, see Kühne, Belonging, 60; Chapoutot, “La loi du sang,”
374, 405. Cf. Steiner, In Bluebeard’s Castle, 45.
If states were not impressive Hans Frank quotations: “Ansprach,” 8; “Einleitung,” 141. For
Schmitt see “Neue Leitsätze,” 516. Cf. Arendt, Essays in Understanding, 290, 295.
Insofar as universal ideas Child: Table Talk, 7. For Hitler’s claim that “Jewish” ideas are all
the same: Mein Kampf, 66 and passim. On Jesus: Bärsch, Die politische Religion, 286–87; on
Saint Paul: Chapoutot, “L’historicité nazie,” 50. See also Thies, Architekt, 29.
Indeed, for Hitler there was No history: Mein Kampf, 291. Always destroys: Table Talk, 314,
similarly at 248; see also Sämtliche Aufzeichnungen, 907; Thies, Architekt, 42. No future: Second
Book, 10. It is true that Hitler calls history his favorite subject in Mein Kampf, but what he means
is his hazy intuition of the forces behind the facts.
Though Hitler strove to define Mann cited after Poliakov, Histoire de l’antisémitisme, 357.
Stein: Self-Portrait in Letters, 9. See Zehnpfennig, Hitlers Mein Kampf, 128; Burrin, Hitler et les
Juifs, 23.
For Hitler, the conclusion Gassing: Husson, Heydrich, 41.
Hitler saw both the struggle “Geistiger Pestilenz”: Mein Kampf, 66. Healthy reaction: cited
after Govrin, Jewish Factor, 7. Entire continent: Staatsmänner, 557.
The fall of man Table Talk, 314. Cf. Friedländer, “Some Reflections,” 100.
Equating nature and politics Zehnpfennig’s interpretation is similar: Hitlers Mein Kampf,
116. See also Neumann, Behemoth, 140.
Hitler accepted that scientists See Jonas, Imperative of Responsibility, 29.
Hitler understood that agricultural Best case, limit, scientific methods, own land: Second
Book, 16, 21, 74, 103. “Todgefährliche Gedankengänge”: Mein Kampf, 141.
Hitler had to defend Mein Kampf, 282–83.
The world’s problem Anarchic state: Husson, Heydrich, 256. “Wohin man die Juden schicke,
nach Sibirien oder nach Madagascar, sei gleichgültig,” July 21, 1941, Staatsmänner, 557.

1. Living Space
Although Hitler’s premise was See Vincent, Politics of Hunger, 126ff; Offer, Agrarian
Interpretation, 2, 24, 25, 59. These works emphasize moral and political discomfort brought by
the blockade. Leonhard estimates 700,000 dead, which is considerably more than Vincent and
Offer seem to suggest. Die Büchse der Pandora, 518.
The world political economy Peaceful economic war: Second Book, 10. Cf. Offer, Agrarian
Interpretation, 82, 83, 217.
Hitler understood that Germany Autarkic economy: Table Talk, 73. German peasants: Mein
Kampf, chap. 2.
The British were to be respected Division of the world: Hildebrand, Vom Reich, 654.
Armageddon: Second Book, 76. See also Mein Kampf, 145.
It was also reassuring The Japanese, for example, tried without success to persuade Hitler to
treat the British rather than the Soviets as the main enemy. See Hauner, India in Axis Strategy,
378, 383–84.
America taught Hitler that need Benchmark: Second Book, 21. Cf. Guettel, “Frontier.”
Guettel is quite right that the number of references to the United States in Mein Kampf is limited,
though the passages are very powerfully suggestive. Hitler proclaims, for example, that the United
States is the model of the new kind of empire, mastering contiguous territories by racial unity
(144). The logic described here is even more apparent in the Second Book. And as Guettel himself
notes, the treatment of Americans as masters of space was ubiquitous in the rhetoric of German
colonialists; Hitler’s references would have been clear. In any case the point is that America
defined a global situation in which standards of living were comparative and relative. See also
Fischer, Hitler and America, 18, 21, 28; Thies, Architekt, 50.
Globalization led Hitler Wildenthal, German Women, 177; Sandler, “Colonizers,” 436.
The inevitable presence Land as limit of science: Second Book, 21; also Mein Kampf, 282.
Hitler made the point directly to Roosevelt in his Reichstagsrede of April 28, 1939; Franz
Neumann stressed this in his Behemoth, 130.
If German prosperity Bleak: Second Book, 105. Racially pure: Mein Kampf, 282. Younger and
healthier: Second Book, 111. For a contemplation of the importance of myths of the soil in the
whole history of mass killing and ethnic cleansing, see Kiernan, Blood and Soil. On the word
Lebensraum see Conrad, Globalisation and the Nation, 61.
While Hitler was writing Cf. Arendt, Origins, 353, 469; and Smith, “Weltpolitik,” 41.
The twentieth century See Longerich, Davon, 160–61. More beauty: Ziegler, Betting on
Famine, 263. Goebbels was discussing the goals of the invasion of the USSR: “für einen voll
gedeckten Frühstücks-, Mittags-, und Abendtisch.” Cited in Koenen, Russland-Komplex, 427. For
an admirable comparative history, see Collingham, Taste of War.
“One thing the Americans have” American spaces: Table Talk, 707. See Guettel, “German
South-West Africa,” 535; Simms, Europe, 339, 343.
All that remained Europe itself: Mein Kampf, 145. May: Table Talk, 316. See McDonough,
Hitler, 22; Mosse, Nationalization, 196. Cf. Arendt, Origins, 183.
In the late nineteenth century Iliffe, “Effects of the Maji Maji Rebellion,” 558–59. Gerwarth
and Malinowski note that the scorched-earth starvation campaign is neglected. “Ghosts,” 283.
Military history: Zimmerer, Von Windhuk, 43. Numbers of Herero and Nama from Guettel,

“German South-West Africa,” 543. See also Chirot and McCauley, Why Not Kill, 28. Trotha
quotation and conditions on Shark Island: Hull, Absolute Destruction, 30, 78; see also Levene,
Rise, 233. Comparison to American states by Theodor Leutwein and quotation of Bernhard
Dernburg from Guettel, “German South-West Africa,” 550, 524. “Vernichtungsoperation” and
“Endlösung” and 70 percent figure from Lower, “German Colonialism,” 5, 2.
A famous German novel Novel: Sandler, “Colonizers,” 162. French: Second Book, 144. An
extended consideration of the differences and connections is Conrad, Globalisation, especially
174, 177, 182. Those who apply Freudian or Girardian arguments to explain the extrusion of
German Jews might also consider German relations with Poles.
When Hitler wrote Kopp, “Constructing a Racial Difference,” 84–85 and passim.
During the First World War Mein Kampf, 144. On the Polish question during the First World
War, see Niemann, Kaiser und Revolution, 25–36; and Rumpler, Max Hussarek, 50–55. On the
cleansing of border zones, see Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen, 125–46. On the politics of the
German-Austrian occupation of Ukraine, see Snyder, Red Prince.
The complete loss See Sandler, “Colonizers,” 19, 35, 149–50, and passim; Wildenthal, German
Women, 172–73.
“The Slavs are born” Slavish mass: Zimmerer, Von Windhuk, 137. Last war: Kay, Exploitation,
40. Inconceivable: Table Talk, 38. Beads and dance: Table Talk, 34, 425. Nazi song: Ingrao,
Believe, 117. Koch: Dallin, German Rule in Russia, 167. See generally the discussion in Lower,
Nazi Empire-Building, 24–29. Conrad’s Heart of Darkness is not actually about Europeans and
Africans as races, as its opening passage makes unmistakably clear. Conrad was a Pole from
Ukraine.
When German occupation came Diary: Berkhoff, Harvest of Despair. States: Mein Kampf,
140. See Jureit, Das Ordnen von Räumen, 219.
Some states, claimed Hitler Foreign intelligentsia and rabbits and leadership in Jewry:
Second Book, 34, 149, 151. Worldview: Müller, Der Feind, 44. See also Mazower, Hitler’s Empire,
152.
Communism was the proximate Control point: Govrin, Jewish Factor, 30. Fortunate: Second
Book, 153. Preparation for domination: Table Talk, 126. See also Sämtliche Aufzeichnungen, 163.
Alexander Stein was making this point in 1936: Adolf Hitler, 111.
Hitler’s interpretation Churchill and Wilson: Cała, Antysemitizm, 175; Zaremba, Wielka
Trwoga, 71. Times: Schlögel, “Einleitung,” 15. Destruction of German people (1936): Dieckmann,
“Jüdischer Bolschewismus,” 55. Immediately: Second Book, 152. Cards and clay: Römer, Der
Kommissarbefehl, 204. Similar process: Kershaw, Hitler, 651.
In this racist collage Interestingly, the quotation about rivers is often given as “Our Mississippi
must be the Volga,” without the final phrase. This alters the meaning and narrows the range of
reference quite substantially. See Kershaw, Hitler, 650. For a history of the United States that
reminds us that Hitler was not wrong in every respect: Mann, Dark Side of Democracy, 70–98.
The history of the United States also demonstrated that slaves could outnumber free settlers.
McNeill, Global Condition, 21.
The destruction of the Soviet Union Mein Kampf, 73. The fundamental work on the Hunger
Plan is Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde. Quotation from Kay, Exploitation, 133; see also 162–63. On
Generalplan Ost see Madajczyk, “Generalplan Ost,” 13; and more recently Wasser, Himmlers
Raumplanung; and Aly and Heim, Vordenker der Vernichtung.
If the war did not See Kershaw, Fateful Choices, 57.
The Judeobolshevik myth Cf. Koselleck, Futures Past, at 222, where he notes that Hitler
distinguished between three levels of secrecy: what he told his immediate circle, what he kept to

himself, and what even he himself did not dare to think through.
From the perspective of Berlin The Bolshevik Revolution is known as the “October
Revolution” because it took place, according to the Julian calendar in force at the time in the
Russian Empire, in October. By the Gregorian calendar the revolution began in November.
Before the revolutions of 1917 This compresses a long and complex history that is expertly
told in Polonsky, Jews of Poland and Russia. Lohr estimates that a Jewish subject of the Russian
Empire was 184 times more likely to emigrate than a Russian subject of the Russian Empire.
Russian Citizenship, 86.
Jews inhabited the western Poliakov, Histoire de l’antisémitisme, 379; Lohr, Nationalizing,
14, 16, 24, 138, 139, 146. The special feature of the pogroms of 1915 was the direct role of the army:
Lohr, “1915,” 41–42. On theft: Wróbel, “Seeds of Violence,” 131. See also Prusin, Nationalizing, 42,
55; Wasserstein, On the Eve, 309. Two of Marc Chagall’s most famous paintings, Cemetery Gates
(1914) and Newspaper Seller (1917) are associated with the Holocaust; in fact they portray this
period.
In the minds of Europeans Creates a Jewish question: Pergher and Roseman, “Imperial
genocide,” 44. Begin: Shilon, Menachem Begin, 6; Stern: Heller, Stern Gang, 100. Sixty thousand:
Budnitskii, Russian Jews, 76. See also Stanislawski, “Russian Jewry,” 281. The continuities of
violent practice are a major theme of Holquist, Making War.
The other side generally Budnitskii, Russian Jews, 90, 176, 213 and passim; Herbeck, Das
Feindbild, 285–87; Beyrau, “Der Erste Weltkrieg,” 103, 107; Lohr, “1915,” 49; Lohr, Russian
Citizenship, 122, 130; Lohr, Nationalizing, 150; Wróbel, “Seeds of Violence,” 137; Dieckmann,
“Jüdischer Bolschewismus,” 59–64. Hitler on the Protocols: Mein Kampf, 302. He seems to be
aware that they are not authentic, but accepts their logic. The Protocols are often described as a
forgery. But a forgery is an imitation of something real, and here nothing is real. The Protocols
were a fiction that enabled life within a fictional world.
Germany backed Offer, Agrarian Interpretation, 50; Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer,
240ff. Some Germans found it possible even in 1918 to imagine Ukraine as empty space: see
Jureit, Das Ordnen von Räumen, 165; but compare Liulevicius, War Land. German war aims in
the East are still a matter of much discussion. The debate centers around Fischer, Griff nach der
Weltmacht.
Once Germany was defeated See Abramson, Prayer for the Government; Dieckmann,
“Jüdischer Bolschewismus,” 59–61. The association of Jews, Bolshevism, and pogroms reached
even the best of minds. Vladimir Nabokov, for example, explained pogroms by the prominence of
Jews in the revolution. Schlögel, “Einleitung,” 15–16.
The vanquished adherents January 1920: Schlögel, “Einleitung,” 15. On the Soviet
representative Viktor Kopps and the “destruction” (unichtozhenie) of the Jews: ibid., 18. On
Scheubner-Richter’s plans for Ukraine and Russia, see Snyder, Red Prince, chap. 6. See generally
Stein, Adolf Hitler, 104–8; Kellogg, Russian Roots, 12, 65, 75, 218; Liulevicius, German Myth,
176; Dieckmann, “Jüdischer Bolschewismus,” 69–75.
The Judeobolshevik idea On the adaptation of Christian images to political purposes see
Herbeck, Das Feindbild, 105–65. For a military history of the Polish-Bolshevik War, see Davies,
White Eagle. On the European settlement as of 1921 see Wandycz, Soviet-Polish Relations, 1917–
1921; and Borzęcki, Soviet-Polish Peace.
The Judeobolshevik myth seemed I am instructed by Jäckel’s judgment: “Perhaps never in
history did a ruler write down before he came to power what he was to do afterward as precisely as
did Adolf Hitler,” in Hitler in History, 23. But within Hitler’s two books there is a political logic
that must be explicated before the next two problems can be solved: how Hitler could come to
power (a minor subject here), and how he could implement his ideas after he came to power (a

major subject here). What might seem to be weaknesses in the thought proved to be opportunities
in practice, and so the thought must be presented first.
In Hitler’s ecology Cf. Pollack, Kontaminierte Landschaften.
During a death march Ozsváth, In the Footsteps of Orpheus, 203, translation at 207.

2. Berlin, Warsaw, Moscow
In the six years after Müller, Der Feind, 43.
After the failure of his coup Hitler’s tactical reticence: Koonz, Nazi Conscience, 11, 12, 21, 25,
22. See also Mosse, Nationalization, 183; Confino, World Without Jews, 151; Engel, Holocaust,
20. On the actual theological compromises that later followed, see Heschel, Aryan Jesus.
After his release Kershaw, Hitler Myth, 230, 233, and passim; Sémelin, Purifier, 89; Koenen,
Russland-Komplex, 390, 413, 415; Bloxham, Final Solution, 143; McDonough, Hitler, 79. On
Hitler’s voters, see King et al., “Ordinary Voting Behavior.” Cf. Hagen’s judgment that Hitler was a
“dangerously self-confident, indefatigable and politically canny man.” German History, 275.
In reality, National Socialism Quotation: Deutschösterreichische Tageszeitung, March 3,
1933. See Koenen, Russland-Komplex, 415.
In 1933, Hitler emerged For a precise discussion see Pauer-Studer, “Einleitung,” 15–17.
In the weeks and months Exemptions and numbers of Polish Jews: Maurer, “Background for
‘Kristallnacht,’ ” 49–51. Counterboycott: Weiss, Deutsche und polnische Juden, 169–79.
An initial inspiration Second Book, 27, 37, 66. See Bloxham, Final Solution, 59–65; Piskorski,
Wygnańcy, 34–60; and more broadly Ferrara and Pianciola, Migrazioni forzate, 39–95.
Hitler was, to a point Second Book, 17. A sophisticated discussion is Tooze, Wages of
Destruction.
He respected the Balkan Model Citation from Neumann, Behemoth, 139; “sticky mass” from
Karin von Schulmann, cited in Harvey, Women, 119. Cf. Jäckel, Hitler in History, 30: “There is
abundant evidence that all the major decisions in the Third Reich were made by Hitler, and there
is equally abundant evidence that the regime was largely anarchic and can thus be described as a
polycracy. The misunderstanding is to suppose that the two observations are contradictory and
that only one of them can be true.”
The theoretical reconciliation I consider the consequences of this difference in Bloodlands.
In 1934, Hitler was 1934: Evans, Third Reich in Power, 42. Civil servants: Bloxham, Final
Solution, 156–57.
The classic definition of the state The perceptive observer Antoni Sobański also noticed that
the uniforms were a way to cover previous affiliations, especially in Berlin. Cywil w Berlinie, 53.
Hitler’s third innovation Cf. Arendt, Origins, 131, 155.
The outlines of this For the larger setting of the SA-SS-Wehrmacht interaction, see Evans,
Third Reich in Power, 21–39. Schmitt: Zarka, Un détail, 11.
Whereas the SA had stood Cf. Wildt, Uncompromising Generation, 127.
This mission of deferred supremacy Ingrao, Believe, 65, 101.
After its triumph Himmler: Wildt, Uncompromising Generation, 135. Iron heart: Fest, Das
Gesicht, 139.
In 1937, Himmler established Buchheim, “Die Höheren SS- und Polizeiführer,” 563, 570, 585.
See Angrick and Klein, “Final Solution,” 41; Bloxham, Final Solution, 204; MacLean, Field Men,
12.
Among the limited responsibilities Dachau: Goeschel and Wachsmann, “Introduction,” 14;
Roseman, “Lives of Others,” 447.
Hitler’s sixth political innovation See Wildt, Uncompromising Generation, 128.

After Hitler’s takeover This subject, at the heart of Holocaust studies, has been developed
superbly elsewhere, and so is treated briefly here. These examples from Husson, Heydrich, 50, 65.
My argument here follows the analysis of Longerich in Politik der Vernichtung. On Schmitt, see
Zarka, Un détail, 19–20.
At the same time Weltjudentum: One of the many acute observations in Klemperer, Language
of the Third Reich, here at 26–27. Book burnings: Confino, World Without Jews, 46–47.
Hitler’s final innovation SS: Jureit, Das Ordnen von Räumen, 395. 1938: Heim, “Einleitung,”
16.
The German calamity of 1918 The fundamental study of statebuilding remains Polonsky,
Politics in Independent Poland. On the National Democratic mindset, see Porter, When
Nationalism. Porter notes the significance of chronotopes, making a case similar to the one I try to
make in the opening and closing chapters. On the politics of culture, see Shore, Caviar and Ashes.
Poland was a new state Taxes: Rothschild, “Ethnic Peripheries,” 602. Generally: Polonsky,
Jews of Poland and Russia, vol. 3.
The question of loyalty Benecke, Ostgebiete, 95–100.
Polish patriotism spread Rothschild made a number of these points concisely in East Central
Europe.
Their differences For a forthright study of antisemitic language in the interwar church, see
Porter-Szücs, Faith.
Dmowski’s opponent For introductions to the old commonwealth and the period of the
partitions that followed, see Stone, State; and Wandycz, Lands.
Piłsudski’s moment was The surest guide remains Polonsky, Politics in Independent Poland.
When Piłsudski returned to power See generally Rothschild, Coup; Chojnowski, Piłsudczycy
u władzy. On Agudat, see Bacon, Politics of Tradition. On the BBWR and Jews: Dowództwo
Okręgu Korpusu II, “Referat o sytuacji polityczno-narodowościowej DOK II,” August 1, 1929,
CAW,
I.371.2/A.88;
Dowództwo
Okręgu
Korpusu
II,
“Referat
o
sytuacji
politycznonarodowościowej DOK II,” November 10, 1930, CAW, I.371.2/A.88; Spektor, “Żydzi
wołyńscy,” 570. On Ukrainians, see Snyder, Sketches.
Piłsudski brought a fake Tomaszewski, “Civil Rights,” 125.
Piłsudski’s fundamental respect The guide to the intellectual background is Walicki,
Philosophy.
For Piłsudski neither Russia A profound study of Piłsudski’s visions of Russia is Nowak, Trzy
Rosje.
Piłsudski was perfectly aware On his relationship with Marxism and Marxists, see Snyder,
Nationalism.
Piłsudski and his comrades I am in accord with Daniel Beauvois that the basic relationship
between the early modern Polish-speaking aristocracy and the Ukrainian populations was a
colonial one. But after four centuries, the end of the commonwealth, generations of common
experiences under the Russian Empire, and the emergence of modern ideas of socialism and
nationalism, it no longer makes sense to use this reductive framework in the twentieth century.
Many of the Poles of this milieu were able to see Ukraine by analogy as a fellow nation. The
National Democrats saw Ukrainians as pre-national but as human, and as such possibly
assimilable to the Polish nation. Here the difference between the Polish and the German elites
might be seen as postcolonial versus precolonial.
After Piłsudski’s return to power See Snyder, Sketches; Copeaux, “Le mouvement”; and the
continuing stream of publications by Kuromiya and Pepłoński. See also Mędrzecki, Województwo
wołyńskie; Kęsik, zaufany Komendanta; Schenke, Nationalstaat und nationale Frage.

The Soviet, Polish, and German On this transformation, see Viola, Unknown Gulag;
Khlevniuk, Gulag; Werth, La terreur; Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain.
In Moscow, Warsaw, and Berlin Collectivization was the central element of the First FiveYear Plan of 1928–1933. It began in earnest in the first weeks of 1930.
This policy brought massive The sequence of events is described in Snyder, Bloodlands, chap.
1, which cites a number of the primary sources. On resistance, see, for example, Graziosi,
“Révoltes paysannes.” For a broad sample of published Soviet archival sources, see Zelenin et al.,
Tragediia sovetskoi derevni.
From the beginning A village flees: Protokół wywiadowczy, 28 March 1930, CAW,
I.303.4.6982. Kiss feet and European states: “Protokół,” 23 April 1930, CAW, I.303.4.6982.
Misery and oppression: K.O.P., Placówka Wywiadowcza Nr. 10, “Protokól,” 25 November 1933,
CAW, I.303.4.6906.
A deliberate mass starvation Forces at border: Placówka Wywiadowcza 9 Czortków, K.O.P.,
“Wiadomości wojskowe,” 3 April 1930, CAW, I.303.4.6982; “Wiadomośći zakordonowe,” Równe, 1
April 1930, CAW, I.303.4.6982.
Polish diplomats in Soviet Ukraine Five million: J. Karszo-Siedlewski, “Sytuacja na
Ukrainie,” 2 October 1933, CAW, I.303.4.1881. Weep: J. Karszo-Siedlewski, Kharkiv, 4 February
1933. On the streets: [Józefina Pisarczykówna] to [Jerzy Niezbrzycki], 13 June 1933, CAW,
I.303.4.2099. Villages: [Leon Mitkiewicz] to [Second Department, Referat Wschód, Warsaw], 6
June 1933, CAW, I.303.4.1928. Militia: Falk, Sowjetische Städte, 298–300. Loyal: [Jerzy
Niezbrzycki] to [Piotr Kurnicki], 16 March 1933, CAW, I.303.4.1993.
The withdrawal of the Poles Ukrainians: [Piotr Kurnicki], Report on public opinion in Soviet
Ukraine, 1935, CAW, I.303.4.1993, quotation at 1. The Polish government had reports from its
border guards as well as from Ukrainians who had fled the famine. Its sources of information were
bountiful. See, for example, the reports from Ukrainians in CAW, I.303.4.5559 and “Zagadnienie
Ukrainizacji,” 12 December 1933, CAW, I.303.4.2011.
The political famine Preemptive attack: Pasztor, “Problem wojny prewencyjnej”; Simms,
Europe, 346.
For Polish leaders Memoirs: Müller, Der Feind, 75. Hitler and generals: Rossino, Hitler Strikes
Poland, 2. See also Simms, Europe, 361; Cienciala, “Foreign Policy,” 136.
Moscow had its own Kuromiya, Stalin, 141 and passim. For a longer discussion see Snyder,
Bloodlands, chap. 3.
In the five years between See Snyder, Bloodlands, chap. 3. For an introduction to the Great
Terror, see Gellately, Stalin’s Curse, 34–46. On numbers of arrests, see Khaustov, “Deiatel’nost’
organov,” 229.
As the Polish Operation began Naumov, Stalin i NKVD, 299.

3. The Promise of Palestine
Naturally, there were Polish [Jerzy Niezbrzycki], 8 June 1935, CAW, I.303.4.1926.
The end of a political life I am using “National Democrats” to describe the party known as
Stronnictwo Narodowe. On the goals of pogroms, see Cała, Antysemityzm, 349; Melzer, No Way
Out, 22; Korzec, Juifs en Pologne, 247; Rudnicki, Równi, 148. For a first survey of their extent, see
Żyndul, Zajścia antyżydowskie.
In 1935, responsibility Transfer of responsibility: Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 7.
OZON: Melzer, No Way Out, 27–29; Hagen, “Before the ‘Final Solution,’ ” 373; Jabotinsky, War
and the Jew, 86. Jewish wife of Miedziński: Wynot, “ ‘Necessary Cruelty,’ ” 1051.
The man responsible All citizens: HI, Polish Embassy Washington, Jews alphabetical files,
Refugees, Warsaw to Washington, 20 May 1938. Beck’s analysis of global political economy: New
York Times, 30 January 1937; JPI, 34/7, Józef Beck, “Wspomnienia,” 143. Drymmer’s analysis:
“Zagadnienie żydowskie,” 66. 150,000: Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 45. First of all: New
York Times, 14 June 1937.
The question of the settlement 1885, Madagassez, Blum, explorers: Brechtken, Madagaskar,
16, 57, 98, 120; see also Korzec, Juifs en Pologne, 250.
Polish authorities also allowed 1926: Friedman, Roads, 44. Blum’s understanding: JPI, 34/7,
Józef Beck, “Wspomnienia,” 146. Nationalists: Drymmer, W służbie, 153. French nationalists:
Marrus and Paxton, Vichy, 61. Understanding Zionism: “Palestine: Polish Attitude,” NA,
CO/733/352/6.
Hitler’s Jewish policy 130,000: Heim, “Einleitung,” 13. 50,000: Husson, Heydrich, 68. Riots:
Morris, Righteous Victims, 128–38.
London at first reacted British and German position: Yisraeli, ha-Raikh, 2; Yisraeli, “Germany
and Zionism,” 158–59. German consul: Herf, Jewish Enemy, 27–28; Mallmann and Cüppers,
Halbmond und Hakenkreuz, 51, 53.
The Polish position differed A good summary of the Polish position in 1937 is Szembek to
London, 18 March 1937, AAN, MSZ 322/18497/35. Boundaries: Drymmer, “Zagadnienie,” 66,
quotation at 70. Sinai and Jordan: NA, CO/733/368/5/30 and 34; also on extension “towards the
south,” Aveling to Eden, 26 July 1937, NA, CO/733/352/6/46. The British were completely aware
of public and official opposition to their policy, but did not seem to suspect where it would lead:
Aveling to Eden, 14 July 1937, NA, CO/733/352/6. Arms and training to Haganah: Melzer, No
Way Out, 142, 152; Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 158. See also New York Times, 9 July
1937. It seems there were two distinct aspects of the Polish policy of military support of Zionism:
(1) more or less open support of the Haganah, and thus the left wing, with arms and training,
arranged by the general staff, with some payment from the Jewish side; and (2) clandestine
support of the Revisionists, and thus the right wing, arranged by the consular section of the
ministry of foreign affairs, with no payment from the Jewish side.
The world Zionist movement Evacuation plan: Melzer, No Way Out, 136. See also Engel,
“Historical Objectivity,” 578.
Jabotinsky wanted Poland Syria: Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 113.
Jabotinsky’s power base The basic work on this subject is now Heller, “Rise of the Zionist
Right”; for these details see 19, 20, 35, 54, 144, 149, 158, 246. Model: Shindler, Military Zionism,
131, 138, 191; Shindler, Military Zionism, 129. Dream: Heller, Stern Gang, 24.

Both Menachim Begin and another Shapira, Land and Power, 196–202, 242. Romantic
poets: Shamir, Summing Up, 6; Shilon, Menachem Begin, 11, 16.
After Piłsudski’s death Heller, “Rise of the Zionist Right,” 144, 145, 162. Also Heller, Stern
Gang, 26; Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 35. On Trempeldor: Zertal, Israel’s Holocaust,
13–14.
Yet disagreement about the meaning Legacies of Piłsudski: Shindler, Military Zionism, 138,
205. Confrontation: Shilon, Menachem Begin, 18; Heller, “Zionist Right,” 93.
By 1938, the Polish ruling elite Decisive significance of riots: Segev, One Palestine, 384.
Origins and name of Irgun: Shindler, Military Zionism, 189; Shilon, Menachem Begin, 12;
Kaplan, Jewish Radical Right, 9; Shapira, Israel, 128. Betar and Irgun: Shavit, Jabotinsky, 56.
Irgun liaised with the Polish Instructions to Hulanicki: Warsaw to Jerusalem, 8 April 1937,
AAN, MSZ 322/B222532/35. See also Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 128, instrument
quotation at 135; and Drymmer, W służbie, 155–56.
Avraham Stern was a child Heller, Stern Gang, 100–103; Golan, Stern, 12. University: M.
Schwabe and H. Pflaum to Dr. Magnes, Jerusalem, 19 December 1929, YMA, 1393/1/4/47/333.
Although he was a talented linguist Poems and literary exercises: YMA, 1393/1/4/43/230;
YMA, 1393/1/4/45/282, 302, 303. Reality: cited in Golan, Stern, 17.
Hulanicki, the Polish consul Ideological leader quotation in Hulanicki to Warsaw, 5 January
1937 [1938], AAN, MSZ 322/B18516/32. Plan: Shavit, Jabotinsky, 229; Bell, Terror, 44. Landing
quotation: Lankin, To Win, 7. The projected size of the Jewish force varies in the sources; the
highest figure I have seen is 45,000: Heller, “Zionist Right,” 95.
Drymmer endorsed Drymmer, “Zagadnienie,” 71; Korboński, “Unknown Chapter,” 374;
Giedroyc, Autobiografia, 45; Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 145; Heller, Stern Gang, 43;
Spector, “Holocaust,” 20; Spektor, “Żydzi wołyńscy,” 573; Snyder, Sketches, 66; and Snyder,
“Volhynian Jews.”
Although Polish leaders The shift from one to the other and the attendant anti-Jewish element
can be seen in Studentowicz, Polska idea, 12, 29, 46, 47; see also Giedroyc, Autobiografia, 62–63,
for a frank description of the ideas of his milieu, at the time essentially the junior league of the
Polish ruling class.
There was some continuity On Drymmer: Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 125. Apostle:
Józewski, “Zamiast pamietnika,” 10.
The continuities were ideological Common anti-communism: AAN, MSZ 322/18497/35,
Szembek to London, 18 March 1937. Emotional appeal: “Notatka z rozmowy wicedyrektora T.
Gwiazdowskiego z. p. Dr. Goldmanem,” AAN, MSZ 322/B18415/21. See also Giedroyc,
Autobiografia, 62.
Yet there were some telling See Paweł, II Rzeczpospolita wobec ruchu prometejskiego, 62,
65, 282.
In the first Prometheanism Porter-Szücs, Faith and Fatherland, 295.
Unlike the Nazi regime Hagen, “Before the ‘Final Solution,’ ” 373, 375. Opposition: Wynot,
“ ‘Necessary Cruelty,’ ” 1043–44.
This was a misunderstanding May 1934: Roos, Polen, 151. Grand design: JPI, 34/7, Józef
Beck, “Wspomnienia,” 93.
It quickly became obvious Debicki, Foreign Policy, 90; Roos, Polen, 209; Müller, Der Feind,
64.
Göring would later return to Białowieża Beorn, Marching into Darkness, 97.
Cults of personality are open Quotation: Weinberg, Foreign Policy, 404.

The hope was that if Poland Totalistic states: Kornat, Polityka równowagi, 147. Stalin:
Kuromiya, Stalin, 141 and passim.
Right after Piłsudski’s Natural ally: JPI, 67/3/9, Jan Szembek, “Uwagi i obserwacje,” August
1936. Propositions to join the Anti-Comintern Pact: Wojciechowski, Stosunki, 389; Kornat, Polen,
156.
This was a trying time for Polish Arrest instructions: [To Outpost E-15 in Ukraine], 7 August
1936, CAW, I.303.4.1956.
General instructions from the Warsaw Military intelligence: [To Outpost K-10, Leningrad],
19 November 1937, CAW, I.303.4.1983.
In summer 1938 Göring in August and discussions of October: Wojciechowski, Stosunki, 423,
510. Ribbentrop-Lipski discussion: Lipski, Diplomat in Berlin, 453. Texts of Polish fallback
negotiating positions on the highway: JPI, 67/76. Weinberg argues that the unwillingness to join
the Anti-Comintern Pact was the key issue. Foreign Policy, 484.
The side talk between German Lipski, Diplomat in Berlin, 411, 453; Husson, Heydrich, 125;
Loose, “Reaktionen,” 48.
In these negotiations Historians of these negotiations often quote Lipski’s remark that Poland
would build a monument to Hitler if he found a way to resolve the Jewish question. With
knowledge of the Holocaust we can find this remark even more revolting than it, in fact, was.
Lipski was expressing the hope that, despite the overwhelming difficulties, Germany could induce
some maritime power to open some overseas colony to Polish Jews. It never occurred to him that
Hitler’s “resolution” could be total mass murder. The remark is evidence of Lipski’s incomplete
understanding of Hitler, which was hardly unique to him, and not of Lipski’s desire for a
Holocaust of the Jews. See Lipski to Beck, 20 September 1938, in Lipski, Diplomat in Berlin, 411;
and Melzer, No Way Out, 143. After the invasion of Poland, Lipski enlisted as a private in France
and fought against the Wehrmacht in 1940.
Most important was what the Poles See Staatsmänner, 557; JPI, 67/3/14, “Krótkie
sprawozdanie z rozmowy Pana Ministra Spraw Zagranicznych z p. Himmlerem w Warszawie,” 18
February 1939. The Himmler quotation is from somewhat later, May 1940, but it conveys the basic
difference in attitudes. Kühnl, Der deutsche Faschismus, 329.
Warsaw’s political vision reached HI, Polish Embassy London, Jewish Emigration 1938,
Consular Department Warsaw [Drymmer] to Jerusalem, 16 December 1938. See also HI, Polish
Embassy London, Polish Consulate General in Jerusalem, Jerusalem to Warsaw, 4 July 1939.

4. The State Destroyers
The Austria where Erika Erika M. quotations: FVA, 2617. On the idea of Lebensunfähigkeit:
Pauley, “The Social and Economic Background.” Figures: Heim, “Einleitung,” 27, 31.
The contradictory Austria These themes are developed at lurid length in the second chapter of
Mein Kampf.
Although Hitler did not For richer discussions, contrast Steininger, “Road to the Anschluss”
and Gehl, Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss. See also Stourzh, Vom Reich zur Republik. On
National Socialism in interwar Austria, see Pollack, Der Tote im Bunker.
Yet for Erika M. See Rabinbach, Crisis.
Beyond Vienna, the leading On Friedrich von Wiesner and Jews and monarchism, see Vasari,
Leidenschaft, 114; Snyder, Red Prince, chap. 7.
Austria’s major political conflict On interwar Austrian politics, see Goldinger and Binder,
Geschichte der Republik Österreich; and then Steininger, Der Staatsvertrag.
The Nazis were never Heim, “Einleiting,” 31–32.
The rise of Hitler Ibid., 17.
Erika M. was right Klamper, “ ‘Anschlusspogrom,’ ” 25; Botz, Nationalsozialismus in Wien,
136. A spiritual portrait of the moment is Stefan Zweig’s Schachnovelle, in which the action takes
place in the year between the destruction of Austria and the destruction of Czechoslovakia.
The next morning the Hecht, “Demütigungsrituale,” 41, 43; Raggam-Blesch, “AnschlussPogrom,” 112, 119; Botz, Nationalsozialismus in Wien, 127. Amusement: FVA, 1224, Ernest
Pollack. Journalist: Gedye, Betrayal, 9–10.
The symbolic destruction of Jewish status Hecht, “Demütigungsrituale,” 53, 67; Heim,
“Einleitung,” 35.
The “scrubbing parties” were FVA, 1371, Herman R.; Gedye, Betrayal, 297. See also Petscher,
Anschluss, 43–47; Der Standard, 2 March 2013; and Botz, “ ‘Judenhatz,’ ” 19.
The Austrian satirist Karl Kraus All of a sudden: FVA, 3970, Charles H.
What Austrian Nazis managed See Dean, Robbing the Jews, 86, 94, 105, 109. Göring: Aly and
Heim, Vordenker, 33.
In 1938, some sixty thousand Jews Figures: Heim, “Einleitung,” 44.
Avraham Stern, the radical Zionist See Wasserstein, On the Eve, 371; Stern: FVA, 226,
William N.
On March 15, 1938 Polish approaches to the United States: HI, Polish Embassy Washington,
Jewish alphabetical files, Warsaw to Washington, “Notatka do rozmowy z sekretarzem stanu,” 15
March 1938; HI, Polish Embassy London, Jewish Emigration 1938, Warsaw to Washington, 20
May 1938.
Polish diplomats worked Drymmer, W słuzbie, 151; Tomaszewski, Preludium, 70; Weiss,
Deutsche und polnische Juden, 195; quotation of Drymmer from Skóra, Słuniba konsularna, 582.
Mechanism: JPI, 67/76, Lipski to Beck, 12 November 1938.
The Nazis understood the implications Tomaszewski, Preludium, 114; Weiss, Deutsche und
polnische Juden, 200. See also chapter 3. The SS had learned lessons from two prior and smaller
attempts at expulsion in 1938: Soviet Jews and Jews from the Burgenland.
In European capitals in 1938 The mutual reinforcement is a theme of Wasserstein, On the

Eve.
The Grynszpan family Kirsch, Short Strange Life, quotation at 82–83.
Some of the top Nazis saw an See Hilberg, Destruction, 1:94–95.
With Kristallnacht, Goebbels Benz, “Pogrom und Volksgemeinschaft,” 13; Jäckel, “Der
November pogrom,” 67–71; Engel, Holocaust, 21; Husson, Heydrich, 100; Kershaw, Hitler Myth,
238; Bajohr and Pohl, Der Holocaust, 43.
Hitler did nothing to defend Friedman, Roads, 45. Göring now spoke of Madagascar: see
Polian, “Hätte der Holocaust,” 4; Steinweis, Kristallnacht, 45. See also Hilberg, Destruction, 1:46.
Henryk Grynberg notices this chain of events: Monolog, 10.
Czechoslovakia was thus like Ragsdale, Munich Crisis, 167.
Czechoslovakia was a creation See Khlevniuk, Stalin, 162–63.
Unfortunately for the French 50 percent of officers killed: Wieczorkiewicz, Łańcuch, 296. See
Ragsdale, Munich Crisis, 36.
Even as London and Paris Troikas: Petrov and Roginskii, “Pol’skaia operatsiia,” 30–31.
Completely destroyed: Jansen and Petrov, Loyal Executioner, 96.
Throughout the territory of Soviet Ukraine Village to village: Stroński, Represje, 235;
Iwanow, Pierwszy naród, 153; Kupczak, Polacy na Ukrainie, 327. 1,226: Nikol’skij, “Die
Kulakenoperation,” 635.
That was the day that Hitler Ragsdale, Munich Crisis, 167.
Czechoslovakia had no part Osterloh, Reischsgau Sudetenland, 186–98; Husson, Heydrich,
84. Seventeen thousand and banking: Rothkirchen, Jews of Bohemia, 78–79 and 105–6.
Poland bordered all parties Artificial creation: JPI, 67/3/11, Beck to Lipski, 19 September
1938. Absurdity: Zarański, Diariusz, 225.
Poland looked like a German Position: JPI, 67/76, Lipski to Beck, 12 November 1938; Moltke
to Berlin, Documents on German Foreign Policy 1918–1945, D, 5:87.
The destruction of Austria Segal, “Imported Violence,” 315–17; Jelinek, Carpathian
Diaspora, 227; Roos, Polen, 375. Lukacs is unusual among scholars writing in English in drawing
attention to this admittedly complicated issue. Last European War, 34 and passim.
As 1939 began, Hitler Hitler and Beck, Memorandum of Conversation, 5 January 1939; and
Ribbentrop and Beck, Memorandum of Conversation, 9 January 1939; [conversation of 6
January], Documents on German Foreign Policy 1918–1945, D, 5:153, 160. See also Müller, Der
Feind, 110.
Hitler’s problem was Ribbentrop and Beck, Memorandum of Conversation, 1 February 1939
[conversation of 26 January], Documents on German Foreign Policy 1918–1945, D, 5:168;
Zarański, Diariusz, 484; New York Times, 25 January 1939. On 25–26 January as the turning
point: Roos, Polen, 395–96; Kershaw, Hitler, 475.
The day of Ribbentrop’s return This interpretation is more or less standard among
diplomatic historians such as Roos, Cienciała, Kornat, and Karski who use the Polish as well as the
German sources. These leave no doubt that Polish diplomats were working hard to keep up an
appearance of rapprochement with Germany while never considering joining Germany in an
offensive war. The idea of a German “illusion” also appears in Korzec, Juifs en Pologne, 255.
Hitler decided to eliminate Kornat, Polen, 158, 169, 174.
On March 21, 1939, Press coordination: Roos, Polen, 135. As late as 1938: JPI, 67/3/11,
“Sprawozdanie P. Ministra Spraw Zagranicznych z Ministrem Propagandy Rzeszy Dr. Goebellsem
w obecności Amb. R. P. w Berlinie Lipskiego,” 13 January 1938. Historians of Germany often treat
March 1939 rather than January as the moment of the decisive break with Poland. This confuses

the mass politics with the diplomacy. In March, Hitler publicized demands that he knew that the
German public would find popular and that he could expect that Western states might find
reasonable, but which were already irrelevant to the German-Polish discussion, the main subjects
of which had been the USSR and the Jews. This is clear from the diplomatic correspondence on
both the German and the Polish sides and unmistakable in the Polish memoir material. The
confrontation of September 1939 was never about Danzig and the corridor; presenting it that way
requires an indulgently literal reading of limited German sources and the exclusion of two
important contexts: Hitler’s prior convictions and, of course, the subsequent Second World War.
The Poles were in a relatively Satellite status: Roos, Polen, 380–81. Pasture: Cienciala,
Lebedeva, and Materski, Foreign Policy, 148. Honor: Wandycz, “Poland,” 203.
Yet neither the collapse HI, Polish Embassy London, Jewish Emigration from Poland 1939,
Consular Department Warsaw to Washington, 10 June 1939; HI, Polish Embassy London, Jewish
Emigration 1938, Consular Department in Warsaw to Paris, 23 November 1938; HI, Polish
Embassy London, Jewish Emigration 1938, “Problem emigracji żydowskiej,” official policy paper,
20 December 1938. See also JPI, 67/3/14, “Krótkie sprawozdanie z rozmowy Pana Ministra Spraw
Zagranicznych z p. Himmlerem w Warszawie,” 18 February 1939.
Polish relations with Britain Geneva: NA, CO/733/368/5/29–31; NA, CO/733/368/5/37–39.
When Beck flew to London Ambassador in Warsaw: Kennard to Cadogan, 7 March 1939;
Halifax to Kennard, 8 March 1939, in Documents on British Foreign Policy, Third Series, 3:203,
205. For the broader setting: Pedersen, “Impact of League Oversight,” especially at 60. See also
Mallmann and Cüppers, Halbmond und Hakenkreuz, 27; Wasserstein, On the Eve, 413.
Despite Warsaw’s new A million: Wasserstein, On the Eve, 412. Make the case: Shavit,
Jabotinsky, 221.
Between February and May Details of training: Lankin, To Win, 35–37; Shilon, Menachem
Begin, 149. See also Yisraeli, “ha-Raikh,” 317; Drymmer, “Zagadnienie,” 71; Heller, Stern Gang,
46. Significance: Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 146–49. A list of the Irgun members
trained is in Niv, M’arkhot ha-Irgun, 172. Unfriendly quotation: Lankin, To Win, 32.
The men to whom Stern Bell, Terror, 48. For discussions among British diplomats and
intelligence officers on the provenance of the weapons, see NA, CO/733/375/5.
Polish military intelligence There is a broad literature on Enigma in Polish and English. See,
for example, Körner, Pleasures of Counting, chap. 13; Gondek, Wywiad polski, 262–63; Kozaczuk
and Straszak, Enigma, and Pepłoński, Kontrwywiad.
After 1933, Polish Mein Kampf, 145.
The Poles could be forgiven Decisive: Govrin, Jewish Factor, 33. 20 August: Haslam, Soviet
Union, 227. Propaganda: Herf, Jewish Enemy, 104. See also Weissberg-Cybulski, Wielka Czystka,
520. Litvinov was fired on 3 May 1939.
By chance the World Zionist Congress Wasserstein, who recalls the scene in On the Eve,
427, departs a bit from the quotation as reported by Yiddish newspapers at the time.
Just as pertinent On propaganda harmony: Govrin, “Ilya Ehrenburg.” Equilibrium and blood:
Weinberg, World at Arms, 25, 57.
Aside from Soviet Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 92.
Avraham Stern in Palestine Stern on pact: Heller, “Zionist Right,” 101. Tank: Shapira, Land
and Power, 198. See generally Hazani, “Red Carpet, White Lilies.”
Stern was about to lose Quotations: Mallmann, Einsatzgruppen, 54. See also Böhler, Der
Überfall, 15.
The invasion of Poland Parade: Moorhouse, Devils’ Alliance, 10–11. Bombing: Böhler, Der
Überfall, 169–72. Seven thousand: Libionka, “ZWZ-AK,” 18.

The German invasion of Poland Klafkowski, Okupacja niemiecka, 38, 41, 52, 55, 72, 73, 85,
95; Madajczyk, “Legal Conceptions,” 138, 143; Mazower, “International Civilization,” 556, 562.
Mazower’s important arguments draw from Madajczyk, who draws in his turn from Klafkowski’s
pioneering work, written immediately after the war. Klafkowski’s study was a response to Carl
Schmitt, written from the perspective of an international lawyer who had experienced firsthand
the practical implications of Schmitt’s arguments.
The nullification of statehood Virgin territory: Chapoutot, “Le loi de sang,” 330. Italians:
Madajczyk, “Legal Conceptions,” 144.
The destruction of the Polish Massive extermination: Mańkowski, “Ausserordentliche,” 7. See
Weitbrecht, Der Executionsauftrag, 17. Heydrich’s instructions: Husson, Heydrich, 201, 207.
The Einsatzgruppen killed about Heydrich quotation: Mazower, Hitler’s Empire, 69. On the
combination of intentions and accidental discoveries in the German progression from Austria
through Czechoslovakia to Poland, Mazower’s account is pioneering and persuasive. On the
transition to stationary police, see Biskupska, “Extermination and the Elite.”
The first fragmentation Soup and bread: Sauerland, Polen, 90.
Much of Poland’s west More freedom of action: Mazower, Hitler’s Empire, 227. For the pidgin
German and other examples, see Epstein, Model Nazi.
In the annexed zones Property and professions: Salmonowicz, “Z problemów,” 49;
Salmonowicz, “Tragic Night,” 13; Engelking and Grabowski, Przestępczość, 14.
The creation of ghettos Urynowicz, “Stosunki,” 555; Klukowski, Zamojszczyzna, 135. On
property acquisition and hostility: Staub, “Origins and Evolution of Hate,” 52. Rape: Böhler, Der
Überfall, 19; Löw and Roth, Juden in Krakau, 27–30. On ghettos, cf. Michman, Emergence, 95. It
is worth considering Arendt’s discussion of colonialism in Africa in this light: Origins, 206.
For most Poles, the ghettoizations Löw and Roth make similar points in Juden in Krakau,
19, 27.
The Jews sent to the ghettos See generally Trunk, Judenrat; also Löw and Roth, Juden in
Krakau, 16.
New Jewish police forces Szeryński: Friedländer, Extermination, 156. Revisionists: Trunk,
Judenrat, 490; this was the case in Lithuania as well, according to Dieckmann, Deutsche
Besatzungspolitik, 2:1056. Duties: Engelking and Leociak, Warsaw Ghetto, 204, 207. Informers:
Finkel, “Victim’s Politics,” 192.
Then that order changed Hempel, Pogrobowcy, 24, 20, 38, 43, 85, 87, 168, 170, 183, 184, 435.
Thirty thousand: Curilla, Judenmord, 837. On the siege of Warsaw, see Biskupska,
“Extermination and the Elite.” Racialization: Seidel, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 184ff. No
punishment of Germans: Browning, Ordinary Men, 170.
Jews, not seen as a race Rickshaws: Engelking and Leociak, Warsaw Ghetto, 108. Tourism:
See Harvey, Women, 131. There was a Baedeker guide to the General Government.
The Nazi racial policy See Rutherford, Prelude, 56–88.
In practice, Himmler Figures from Rutherford, Prelude, 9. Heydrich: Brandon, “Deportation,”
77–78, 86. Eichmann: Polian, “Hätte der Holocaust,” 3, 4, 19.
The ghettos became Eichmann: Husson, Heydrich, 253. Cf. Müller, Der Feind, 107–10.
This was the latest surprise Planning for Madagascar: Kershaw, Fateful Choices, 447.
When Hitler understood that Quotations: Lukacs, Last European War, 105; Mazower,
Hitler’s Empire, 133. 31 July 1940 preparations for attack on USSR instead: Müller, Der Feind,
216–21; Megargee, War of Annihilation, 22.

5. Double Occupation
During the war Arendt, Eichmann, 240; see also Arendt, Origins, 22. It is interesting to note
that the scholars who were most influential in the foundation of Holocaust studies did not
themselves use east European languages, including Yiddish. Hilberg’s parents spoke Polish but he
did not. Friedländer hails from Prague but does not use Czech. No major historian of the
Holocaust learned an east European language after 1989, even as a vast wealth of sources became
available and new secondary literatures emerged. Some of the consequences of this are the subject
of my “Commemorative Causality.”
Like succeeding historians Arendt, Origins, 447. See also Bloxham, Final Solution, 283.
In 1939, when Hitler On state destruction by proxy, cf. Stein, Adolf Hitler, 99. Hitler on Soviet
practices: Mein Kampf, 320. On Himmler: Kühnl, Der deutsche Faschismus, 329.
The Germans found the conditions See Levin, Lesser of Two Evils, xi. A body of sociological
literature supports the kindred thesis that strong local institutions prevent crime. See Lafree,
“Social Institutions,” 1349, 1367.
When the Germans and the Soviets Numbers from Morris, “Polish Terror,” 759. This subject
is treated in Snyder, Bloodlands, chaps. 2 and 3. See also Gurianov, “Obzor,” 202; Nikols’kyi,
“Represyvna diial’nist’,” 337–40; Martin, “Origins.”
In 1938, Stalin In the Ukrainian NKVD, for example, sixty of the ninety ranking officers were
Jewish in 1936. Zolotar’ov, “Nachal’nyts’kyi sklad,” 326–31. Other figures from Gregory, Terror,
63. Stalin achieved here one of his great political successes, the consequences of which are still felt
today. Ethnic operations that he ordered were blamed on Jews, because Jews were among the
officers who carried them out; but immediately thereafter Jewish officers were purged from the
NKVD. Thus, people who oppose communism but do not wish to oppose Stalin, the Soviet Union,
or Russia can always combine it with antisemitism; this opportunity for National Bolshevism or
east European fascism was opened then, and remains open today.
It was this NKVD See Gross, Revolution from Abroad, 37–44, and Carynnyk, “Palace,” 266–67;
and for primary sources HI, Anders Collection, 209/1/4835; 209/6/5157; 209/6/2411;
209/6/4724; 209/7/4112; 209/7/799; 209/7/6601.
Against this backdrop Calm after chaos as policy: “Komandiram, Komissaram, i
Nachpolitorganov Soedinenii,” 24 September 1939, CAW, VIII. 800.7.15; as experienced: HI,
Anders Collection, 209/13/3960. Majorities: Głowacki, Sowieci, 292; Khlevniuk, Gulag, 236.
Unlike the Germans Total figure from Deportatsii pol’skikh grazhdan, 29. 139,794 and
percentages: Hryciuk, “Victims 1939–1941,” 184, 191; Wnuk, Za pierwszego Sowieta, 13, 372.
One of the individuals Herling, World Apart, 39, 65, 131, 132. On spontaneity, see Arendt,
Origins, 438.
From the Soviet perspective Quotations: Cienciala, Lebedeva, and Materski, Katyn, 118, 140.
In April 1940 For Strasman: Korboński, “Unknown Chapter,” 375. For the Engelkreis,
Brandwajn, and Proner families, see Spanily, Pisane miłością, 49, 112, 387.
With one exception Social background and Blokhin: Cienciala, Lebedeva, and Materski, Katyn,
25, 124. Deportation of families: Goussef, “Les déplacements,” 188; Jolluck, Exile, 15 and then
passim on the experience of women; Cienciala, Lebedeva, and Materski, Katyn, 173–74.
Strasman: Korboński, “Unknown Chapter,” 375. Jewish neighbor helps: Spanily, Pisane miłością,
187. Janina Dowbor, a daredevil glider and parachutist, was the one woman. She trained as a pilot

in 1939, and enlisted in the Polish air force reserve. Her plane was apparently shot down by the
Germans. After parachuting to safety, she was arrested by the Soviets as a Polish second
lieutenant. On 21 or 22 April 1940, she was shot at Katyn, and buried along with 4,409 men.
There was also continuity On the Great Terror in Moscow: Schlögel, Terror und Traum, 602;
Baberowski, Der rote Terror, 195.
The Soviets, at least some Moral sublimity: Fest, Das Gesicht, 162. For further reflections on
similarity and difference, see Snyder, Bloodlands.
In western and central Frank quotation: Longerich, Unwritten Order, 47.
An empire on Nazi principles Prison to power: HI, Anders Collection, 209/1/10420,
209/1/2660, 209/1/3571, 209/1/3817/19, 209/1/3517, 209/1/6896 (Dubno County); 209/3/6238
(Horochów); 209/6/5157, 209/6/2376, 209/6/2652, 209/6/4303, 209/6/4284, 209/6/9083
(Kostopol); 209/11/4217, 209/11/3887, 209/11/4049, 209/11/3238, 209/9/6105 (Krzemieniec);
210/14/10544, 210/14/4527, 210/14/2526 (Zdołbunów); 209/13/2935, 209/13/8034 (Luboml);
210/12/1467, 210/12/9728, 210/12/5945.
The Soviet decapitation See Danylenko and Kokin, Radians’kyi orhany, 233–55, for examples
of agents at work. See also Wnuk, “Za pierwszego Sowieta”; Nowak-Jeziorański, “Gestapo i
NKVD”; revealing though on a later period: Burds, “Agentura.”
After the obligatory Butchers: Margolin, Reise, 14.
The Soviets behaved RAF: Moorhouse, Devils’ Alliance, 154–55. Song: Kuromiya, Freedom
and Terror, 258.
In putting an end to capitalism Revisions: HI, Anders Collection, 310/14/4908. Cygielman:
HI, Anders Collection, 210/9/4061. Kovel shops: HI, Anders Collection, 209/7/4775. Arms
searches: HI, Anders Collection, 210/12/8117.
The end of the Polish On the rapid change in property regime, see Gross, Revolution, 37;
Sauerland, Polen, 72. Szef: HI, Anders Collection, 210/1/5331.
The massive scale of Soviet Gunpoint: HI, Anders Collection, 209.
Most Jews in eastern Poland Volhynia figures from 1937 in “Omówienie wydawnictwa
Wołyńskiego Urzędu Wojewódzkiego p. t. ‘Wołyń,’ ” June 1937, CAW, I.371.2/A.100. Abolition of
the złoty and generally: Bender, Jews of Białystok, 60–62, 70, 83.
In altering the character Cf. Mędykowski, W cieniu, 243.
In other ways Soviet policy For a theoretical reflection on the Polish historiography of double
occupation, see Shore, “Conversing with Ghosts,” 5–28.
Even as Soviet power Excellent examples in Wnuk, ‘Za pierwszego Sowieta’; see also Gross,
Sąsiedzi, 35.
In the Ukrainian case See Martin, Affirmative Action Empire; and Snyder, Sketches.
That said, the Ukrainian Ideological confusion: Dowództwo Okręgu Korpusu II,
“Sprawozdanie o ruchu komunistycznym na terenie DOK. Nr. II za czas od dn. 15 VI do 15 × 1933
r.,” 13 November 1933, CAW, I.371.2/A.91; Dowództwo Okregu Korpusu II, “Sprawozdanie o
ruchu komunistycznym na terenie DOK. Nr. II za czas od dn. 15 × 1934 do 15 I 1935 r.,” CAW,
I.371.2/A.92; “Nastroje wśród oddziałów 13 D.P,” Równe, 14 April 1937; CAW, I.371.1.2/A.103.
Szprynger and “Hitler”: Dowództwo Okregu Korpusu II, “Sprawozdanie o ruchu komunistycznym
na terenie DOK. Nr. II za czas od dn. 15 VII 1937 do 15 × 1937 r.,” CAW, I.371.2/A.92. This is a
subject of Snyder, Sketches.
The Soviet invasion of eastern Destruction of legal parties and UNDO: Danylenko and Kokin,
Radians’kyi orhany, 214–18, 251. Every village: Il’iushyn, OUN-UNP, 17.
During the first few months Jewish mayors: Levin, Lesser of Two Evils, 44. On
collectivization and changing attitudes: “Meldunek specjalny—Sprawa Ukrainíska,” 25 November

1941, SPP, 3/1/1/1/1. For an example, see Shumuk, Perezhyte i peredumane. Revolution from
Abroad is the title of Gross’s classic study.
All in all, Soviet occupation Arrests of Zionists: “Calendar of Pain,” Sefer Lutsk. Begin: Shilon,
Menachem Begin, 25, 29; Shindler, Military Zionism, 218. NKVD and Irgun: Hrynevych,
Nepryborkane riznoholossia, 296.
Betar was quickly powerless Letter of 27 December 1939, NA, KV/2/2251/7a. See Lankin, To
Win, 40; Bell, Terror Out of Zion, 52; Weinbaum, Marriage of Convenience, 140.
Of the three European states Shamir’s hope: Shamir, Summing Up, 54.
The appeals sent by Jewish Stern’s proposal: Yisraeli, “ha-Raikh,” 315.
Stern assumed that Hitler See Bell, Terror Out of Zion, 69.
Every method of changing See Heller, Stern Gang, 19. Jabotinsky was simultaneously urging
the British to accept the inevitable wave of Polish-Jewish refugees (without success). See, for
example, Jabotinsky to MacDonald, 5 September 1939, NA, CO/733/368/5/9.
These Jewish and Ukrainian See Mallmann and Cüppers, Halbmond und Hakenkreuz.
In 1940, the application A boy called Joseph remembered that his family fled the German zone
after laughing Germans had burned down the synagogue. His father had decided to flee east and
take refuge with a friend. He did not want to take Soviet passports because he wanted to be able to
return home after the war. The family was deported to the Gulag. First Joseph’s brother died, then
his parents. Gross and Gross, War Through Children’s Eyes, 221.
In the first half of 1940 NKVD: Hrynevych, Nepryborkane riznoholossia, 299.
With the wider world unattainable Quotation: Rabin, Vishnivits: sefer zikaron, 315. See
Melnyk, “Stalinist Justice,” 231. The Lesser of Two Evils is the title of Levin’s classic work.
Before the consecutive Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:87, 95, 127, 128. On
absence of pogroms see Sirutavičius and Staliūnas, “Was Lithuania,” 146–50.
By the standards of Europe 23,000: Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:144. 1,500:
Łossowski, Kraje bałtyckie, 145–47. Lemkin: See his Totally Unofficial, 29.
As a result of the German-Soviet On the pogrom, see Dieckmann, Deutsche
Besatzungspolitik, 1:142.
In late 1939 and early 1940 Quotations: Levin, Lesser of Two Evils, 198; Klarman to Levin, 8
November 1939, NA, KV/2/2251/4a; NA, KV/2/2251/1a. Zionists: Bender, Jews of Białystok, 66;
also the memoir of Good, “ ‘Jerushalayim,’ ” 13–14. Base: Hrynevych, Nepryborkane
riznoholossia, 294. On the Lithuanian-Polish question in Vilnius, see Snyder, Reconstruction of
Nations, chaps. 1–4.
The position of Jews Ezergailis, Holocaust in Latvia, 63, 69, 83. Angrick and Klein, Final
Solution, 12. On the Agudat movement see Bacon, Politics of Tradition.
The subsequent and rapid Weiss-Wendt emphasizes humiliation in his account of Estonia
(Murder Without Hatred, 39), as does Plavnieks in his fine dissertation “Nazi Collaborators,” 41.
Dieckmann favors the notion of shame: Deutsche Besatzsungspolitik, 1:114.
The political resource included Repatriation: MacQueen, “White Terror,” 98. Lithuanians:
Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 92–95. Weiss-Wendt estimates at least 1,821 Latvians
(and 2,055 Estonians; Estonia will be discussed in a later chapter). Murder Without Hatred, 36.
The timing of the Soviet Dieckmann gives a range of 16,989 to 17,500: Deutsche
Besatzungspolitik, 1:152. A Soviet report gives the figure of 9,817 shot in prison, 1,439 shot on the
convoys, and another 1,059 who died on the convoys for an unspecified reason. Vladimirtsev,
NKVD-MVD, 67–68.

6. The Greater Evil
“The epoch of statehood” In his famous Der Begriff des Politischen of 1932, discussed in
Jureit, Das Ordnen von Räumen, 358. It is true that Schmitt was criticized from within the party
for being too attached to the conventional state. But what he meant by a “total state” is not an ever
larger one, but rather one that is defined by the animal, pre-political energy of the racial party,
which is to create a “total revolution.” See Faye, “Carl Schmitt,” 164, 171.
Beyond manipulation itself Quotations: Schmitt, “Grossraum Order,” 105, 124, 101. See
Gross, Carl Schmitt and the Jews, 147–49, and Nunan, “Translator’s Introduction.” Cf. Sternhell,
Les anti-Lumières, 618.
Schmitt believed that the Infection: Schmitt, “Eröffnung,” 15. Jurists: Chapoutot, “Le loi de
sang,” 310–12. Seyss-Inquart quotation: Liulevicius, German Myth, 171.
Frank, Hitler’s personal Frank quotations: Frank, “Einleitung,” 141–42; Frank, “Ansprach,” 9.
Theft of silver: Snyder, Red Prince, chap. 9. His wife’s robbery of the ghetto: Löw and Roth, Juden
in Krakau, 27.
Lawyers were extremely Mallmann, Einsatzgruppen, 23.
Germany at war remained This argument from politics is influenced by Longerich’s Politik
der Vernichtung; what seems crucial is to extend political argument beyond the borders of the
prewar Reich to the lands where the Holocaust took place, and beyond German actors to those
with whom they interacted.
As the Einsatzgruppen followed Churchill quotation: Saviello, “Policy,” 24.
The Holocaust has Calculation of one million: Brandon, “First Wave.” See Benz, Kweit, and
Mathäus, Einsatz, 33. In March 1941, Heydrich proposed to Göring a plan for the deportation of
Jews to Siberia. Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde, 747; Kay, Exploitation, 109.
Sometimes the Einsatzgruppen who followed Basic task is state destruction: Husson,
Heydrich, 310.
Antisemitism cannot fully Benz, Kweit, and Mathäus, Einsatz, 73. See Angrick,
Besatzungspolitik.
Even the most hidebound Nazis This nazified line of reasoning is resonant today. I try to
explain why in Snyder, “Commemorative Causality.” On Lithuanian pogroms: Dieckmann,
Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 2:1512 and passim.
After the war, Soviet On the postwar campaigns against Ukrainian and Lithuanian nationalists,
which form the backdrop for these arguments, see Snyder, Reconstruction.
It is tempting to imagine The most useful synthesis is now Polonsky, Jews in Poland and
Russia, vol. 3. Cf. Longerich, Davon, 161; Ezergailis, Holocaust in Latvia, 13–15.
The commencement of mass killing What is meant is not the rationalities involved in what
Foucault calls governmentality, but rather the deliberate destruction of government in a
traditional sense in the name of biology and in the expectation that biology can then reassert itself.
This destruction does not end politics but does create a new setting in which a new kind of politics
emerges. See Naissance de la biopolitique, 316.
In a dark irony German beliefs: Benz, Kweit, and Mathäus, Einsatz, 34.
To a degree The important notion of double collaboration was introduced by Gross in Sąsiedzi
and has since figured in local studies such as Snyder, “Causes”; Brakel, Unter Rotem Stern und
Hakenkreuz; Penter, Kohle; and Weiss-Wendt, Murder Without Hatred. It should be the topic of

detailed empirical study.
The Soviet system was not See Mędykowski, W cieniu, 160.
What local people expected An Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) informer on
OUN intelligence cooperation with Germany: “Komunikat Informacyjny,” 3 June 1932, AAN,
MSW/1040/50–57.
As Ukrainian nationalists Propaganda inside Germany: Longerich, Davon, 159. Himka makes
the point about ethnicization in “Ethnicity and Reporting.” The case of Oleksandr Kohut:
Kachanovs’kyi, “OUN(b),” 220, 223. On the calculation of shooting prisoners: Carynnyk, “Palace,”
280–81.
In Lwów on July 25, 1941 Kill one Jew: Prusin, Lands Between, 158. Mizoch: HI, Anders
Collection, 210/14/7746; HI, Anders Collection, 210/14/3327. On Mizoch in the Soviet period, see
ŻIH, 301/1795.
By reducing actual Ukrainian Klevan: ŻIH, 301/1190, Abraham Kirschner. Dubno: ŻIH,
301/2168, Pinches Fingerhut; Adini, Dubno: sefer zikaron, 698–701. On German confusion in
Dubno: Carynnyk, “Palace,” 293. On police continuity: Bauer, The Death of the Shtetl, 64. For
development of the double collaboration theme, see Snyder, “Causes,” 208–9.
Jews were ordered This recounting draws from Curilla, Judenmord, 246–51; and Bender, Jews
of Białystok, 90; see also Matthäus, “Controlled Escalation,” 223; Machcewicz, “Rund um
Jedwabne,” 73–74. Ten men in small synagogue: FVA, 2903, Leon F.
In those days of late June Heydrich on 29 June: “Spurenlos auszulösen, zu intensivieren
wenn erforderlich und in die richtigen Bahnen zu lenken, ohne dass sich diese örtlichen
‘Selbstschutzkreise’ später auf Anordnungen oder auf gegebene politische Zusicherungen berufen
können.” Cited in Justiz und NS-Verbrechen, vol. 43, 2010, Lfd. Nr. 856, 177–78. Score settling
political but not ethnic: Machcewicz, “Rund um Jedwabne,” 72–73. The same was true in
Romania; this will be discussed in a later chapter.
If Heydrich’s order Presence of Himmler with Kurt Daluege, the head of the Ordnungspolizei
in Białystok on 8 July: Bender, Jews of Białystok, 94. Himmler’s disappointment: Rossino,
“Violence,” 6. Himmler, Heydrich, Göring interest: Dmitrów, “Die Einsatzgruppen,” 127, 145, 155.
The presence and preferences Police units: Dmitrów, “Die Einsatzgruppen,” 112–27;
Machcewicz, “Rund um Jedwabne,” 75.
The Germans were learning The empirical argument is in Kopstein and Wittenberg, “Intimate
Violence,” chap. 4. Local polarization seems to have general explanatory power: see Croes,
“Holocaust in the Netherlands,” 484.
The most notorious pogrom Conditions: Kopstein and Wittenberg, “Intimate Violence,” chap.
4; Bikont, My z Jedwabnego; also Gross, Sąsiedzi, 29. Traitor: Gross, Sąsiedzi, 35; Sauerland,
Polen, 83.
The scenography Flag: Gross, Sąsiedzi, 12. Cf. Cała, Antysemitizm, 433.
In northeastern Poland Machcewicz, “Rund um Jedwabne,” 65, 69, 70, 72.
The Jedwabne method Sauerland, Polen, 66; Machcewicz, “Rund um Jedwabne,” 86.
The presence or absence About 1,100 of the Jews murdered in Lithuania were killed in
pogroms: less than one percent of the total number killed. Dieckmann, Deutsche
Besatzungspolitik, 2:1512.
The Germans understood According to Łossowski, Kraje bałtyckie, 164, some 50,000 people
left Lithuania as Germans during the Soviet period, of whom one-half returned.
The Lithuanian activists arrived Business figures from Levin, Lesser of Two Evils, 69.
The politics of mass killing In June 1941, the Lithuanian Communist Party was almost 40
percent Russian, about 46 percent Lithuanian, and 13 percent Jewish. The communist security

police was about 46 percent Lithuanian, 36 percent Russian, and 17 percent Jewish in 1940. So in
both cases Jews were considerably overrepresented by comparison to their share of the population
but about a third as numerous as Lithuanians. Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:165–69.
Actual political experience Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:248–53; see also
Lower, “Pogroms,” 224. Communist youth: Eidintas, Jews, 257.
Double collaboration Wette, Karl Jäger, 82; Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:297.
The Germans never did Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:534. Knyrimas and
Baranauskas: Eidintas, Jews, 256.
Vilnius, the Jerusalem On the Polish-Lithuanian-Jewish question in wartime Vilnius, see
Snyder, Reconstruction, chap. 4.
This innovation took place Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 2:906, 1511. Hitler,
Goebbels, marking of Jews: Longerich, Davon, 165–68. On perceptions in the field about the
course of the war, see inter alia Römer, Kommissarbefehl, 204.
If the Soviet Union Ingrao, Believe, 236. Cf. Fritzsche, “Holocaust and the Knowledge,” 603. In
Germany: Longerich, Davon, 160–61. Filbert and translation: Kay, “Transition to Genocide,” 413–
25; see also Ingrao, Believe, 81, 158–59; Ingrao “Violence de guerre,” 236–37; Römer,
Kameraden, 410, 414, 448, 462.
Their hesitations about Kay, “Brothers.”
The Nazi conviction Large numbers of Latvians return: Ezergailis, Holocaust in Latvia, 48; see
also 155, 165–66. Liberation from the Jews: Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:513. See
also Silberman, “Jan Lipke,” 87.
By now Stahlecker Naturally: Breitmann, “Himmler,” 436. Channeling: Wette, Karl Jäger, 78.
The Arājs Kommando On Arājs and his commando, see Justiz und NS-Verbrechen, vol. 43,
2010. Lfd. Nr. 856, 173–83; Kaprāns Vita Zelče, “Vēsturiskie cilvēki,” 169–70, 173–74; Plavnieks,
“Nazi Collaborators,” 41–49, 72–85; Vīksne, “Members of the Arājs Commando,” 189–202;
Angrick and Klein, Final Solution, 74 and passim; Ezergailis, Holocaust in Latvia, 177, 183, 188.
Russians: Kudryashov, “Russian Collaborators,” 3. Looting: Bender, Jews of Białystok, 95.
The Einsatzgruppen were a hybrid Quotation: Ezergailis, Holocaust in Latvia, 206. See
Bloxham, Final Solution, 130.
Aside from the Einsatzgruppen 12 August: Kruglov, “Jewish Losses,” 275.
Jeckeln’s innovation See Pohl, “Schauplatz Ukraine,” 142–44; Angrick and Klein, Final
Solution, 130.
The easternmost part Segal, “Beyond,” 5–9, quotation at 5; Jelinek, Carpathian Diaspora,
234. See also Mędykowski, W cieniu, 287. Between 1867 and 1918, the Habsburg domains were a
dual monarchy known as Austria-Hungary. The government in Budapest was sovereign in its
domestic affairs. The king of Hungary was the same person as the emperor of the entire realm,
Franz Josef.
Hungary made Jews stateless Vladimir P.: FVA, 2837. Béla Kun: Ingrao, Believe, 153.
If the Judeobolshevik Breitmann, “Himmler,” 433–44. Thirty-three thousand: Kershaw,
Fateful Choices, 456. Letter home: Schneider, Auswärts eingesetzt, 215. More than EG: Lower,
“Axis Collaboration,” 186. See also Pohl, Herrschaft der Wehrmacht, 152; Curilla, Judenmord,
851.
On September 28, 1941 Pohl, Herrschaft der Wehrmacht, 259; Pohl, “Schauplatz Ukraine,”
147; Pohl, “Ukrainische Hilfskräfte,” 213. Rape and party: Schneider, Auswärts eingesetzt, 465,
471. Already bloodied: Dina Pronicheva, “Stenogramma,” 24 April 1946, TsDAVO,
166/3/245/115–34; see also Dina Pronicheva, Darmstadt, 29 April 1968, IfZ, Gd 01.54/78/1758–
76. For a description of the experience from Jewish perspectives, see Berkhoff, Harvest of

Despair, 61–68; and Berkhoff, “Dina Pronicheva’s Story.”
Many of the aged and infirm More research is needed on the pogroms in the prewar Soviet
Union in 1941. On Kyiv see Melnyk, “Stalinist Justice,” 230, 238.
At the end of 1941 Angrick and Klein, Final Solution, 114.

7. Germans, Poles, Soviets, Jews
“The East belongs to the SS!” Wasser, Himmlers Raumplanung, 51. See generally Gerwarth,
Heydrich.
Organized massacres involving Percentages derived from Arad, Holocaust, 521, 524. For
examples of collaboration, see the cases below. On the NKVD, see Kuromiya, Freedom and
Terror, 268.
The Germans reached The Estonian case will be discussed at greater length in the next
chapter.
The prewar Soviet Union Bemporad, “Politics of Blood,” 4–5, 8.
In an unhappy sequence Three hundred thousand estimate: Pohl, Herrschaft der Wehrmacht,
119. Denunciations: Reid, Leningrad, 125. Ideological interval: Hrynevych, Nepryborkane
riznoholossia, 111–20; Moorhouse, Devils’ Alliance, 130. Kyiv example: Schneider, Auswärts
eingesetzt, 462; Prusin, “Community of Violence,” 1.
The Judeobolshevik myth Rabin, Vishnivits: sefer zikaron, 300.
In doubly occupied western Valuable on the entire period and on the question of nationalism
beyond western Ukraine is Berkhoff, Harvest of Despair.
In Zhytomyr, the major city On the terror in Zhytomyr, see chapter 2. Leaflets: Lower, Nazi
Empire-Building, 34.
When war came to Zhytomyr For the exchange see Lower, “German Colonialism,” 22. See
also Lower, Nazi Empire-Building, 34–35.
Kharkiv was the major city Terror and bread and salt: FVA, 3272, Pyotr Borisovich L.
In any large Soviet city Gangsters: Radchenko, “Accomplices,” 445.
When the Kharkiv Radchenko, “Accomplices,” 443–58; details about the march from FVA,
3270, Lydia G.
The mass shooting of the Jews Lower, “German Colonialism,” 26; Radchenko, “Accomplices,”
443–58, trash quotation at 454.
No matter where the Germans arrived Tyaglyy, “Nazi Occupation,” 127, 141.
Because Army Group South of the Wehrmacht On the Gypsies, see Holler, Völkermord,
68–69.
In Stalino, as elsewhere Penter, Kohle, 270–81; Kuromiya, Freedom and Terror, 263–88.
The initial German policy Pripiat: Matthäus, “Controlled Escalation,” 225; Der
Dienstkalender Heinrich Himmlers, 189. Nebe: Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde, 544, 549, 567. See
Mędykowski, W cieniu, 231. Belarusians and Poles: Dean, “Service of Poles.”
With less local collaboration Beorn, Marching into Darkness, 73.
Not long afterwards Ibid., 97.
By October 1941 Megargee, War of Annihilation, 99.
Unlike Operation Barbarossa Quotation: Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde, 588.
Once Operation Typhoon Beorn, Marching into Darkness, 7, 60, 62, 73, 120, 133.
In Minsk 7 November and other symbolic dates in Minsk: Rubenstein and Altman, Unknown
Black Book, 238, 245, 251, 252. Communists: Rein, “Local Collaboration,” 394; see also Brakel,
Unter Rotem Stern und Hakenkreuz, 304. On Soviet Jews in Minsk, see Bemporad, Becoming.

With the advance of Operation Identification of Jews with partisans, beginning September
1941: Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde, 566.
The policy of mass Vans: Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde, 1075. The “black crow” reference is
ubiquitous; see, for example, USHMM, RG-31.049/01, Evgenia Elkina. The killing with vans was
also an extremely grisly business; some Germans preferred shooting. See Prusin, “Community of
Violence.”
By the end of 1941 Rasch: Lower, “German Colonialism,” 24.
Whereas the Germans Kudryashov, “Russian Collaboration,” 4–5, 15; Penter, Kohle, 275; Reid,
Leningrad, 125. The Germans murdered Gypsies in the outskirts of Leningrad as well; with what
degree of local cooperation remains to be seen. See Holler, “Nazi Persecution,” 157.
In the cities of Soviet Russia Cohen, Smolensk, 64, 68, 78, 79, 122.
In nature, thought Hitler German starvation policies are covered in Snyder, Bloodlands,
chapter 5.
The German invasion Quotation: Arnold, “Die Eroberung,” 35. Dieckmann develops the idea of
the distribution of scarcity; see Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:536, 579–83.
Like the politics of Judeobolshevism Cf. Gerlach, “Wannsee Conference.” I agree that
December was a turning point and am inclined to see it as Hitler’s decision to announce an intent
to eliminate all Jews rather than an explicit order to kill them all, but taken at a time when killing
them was proving to be easier than deporting them. In early 1942, Heydrich and others were still
discussing deportations to Siberia, which would have been senseless had there been an explicit
order to murder; the failure of German offensives and Heydrich’s assassination must have made
such a deportation seem unrealistic. The technique of fixed gassing facilities then developed in
Poland was not initially meant as a total solution, but it proved more feasible than anything else,
and was pursued to the end. In my understanding, Hitler’s determination from the beginning was
to eliminate the Jews from the planet; it was a matter of indifference whether this was achieved
through murder or through deportation to some inhospitable place. What is chilling is not a
diabolical plan that was followed to the letter; there was no such thing. What is chilling is a
worldview in which individuals are defined as a supernatural collectivity such that their removal is
seen as ethical and the method of removal makes no moral difference.
The autumn of 1941 FVA, 368, Iurii Israilovich G.
The battle for Kaluga Stieff cited after Edele, “States,” 374.
That very day Common front: Herf, Jewish Enemy, 132 and passim. Hitler’s 12 December
speech as recorded by Goebbels: Mazower, Hitler’s Empire, 376; see also Witte et al., Der
Dienstkalender Heinrich Himmlers, 289. Cf. Friedlander, Extermination, 281. Once the United
States was in the war it had to be presented by Hitler not as a distant model but as a fragile enemy,
“half Judaized and half negrified”: Fischer, Hitler and America, 37.
In the occupied zones Pity quotation: Mazower, Hitler’s Empire, 376. Reckoning of the
number of Jews killed by the end of 1941: Brandon, “First Wave.”
The lessons of the USSR Some 1,500 Poles were among the collaborating police forces in the
territories that are now Belarus. The Germans sought to reduce this number when they could,
favoring Belarusians. See Dean, “Service of Poles,” 6. The main collaborating Polish formations
were the 107th and the 202nd Schutzmannschaft Battalions. In general, Poles were recruited to
such formations in times and places where Ukrainian policemen deserted in 1943 to form a
Ukrainian partisan army. In some cases Poles joined such formations to avenge ethnic cleansing
by Ukrainian nationalists. See Snyder, “Origins,” and Snyder, Reconstruction of Nations.
On January 30, 1942 Hillgruber, “Grundlage,” 286. Arendt noticed the problem with prophecy;
see Origins.

That same month Quotation: Table Talk, 235. Leningrad estimate: Reid, Leningrad, 231.
Estimate of about a million: Pohl, Herrschaft der Wehrmacht, 181; similarly Arad, Holocaust, 311.
Africa and hunger motivation: Kuwałek, Vernichtungslager, 110–11. See also Madajczyk,
“Generalplan Ost,” 17. Askaren: Black, “Askaris,” 279; Sandler, “Colonizers,” 8. The Germans said
“Askaren”; in English “Askaris.”
No one had to say October: Heydrich, Husson, 437. See also Rieger, Globocnik, 60–61 and 103,
where he dates the meeting to late September. For a list of the sites of oppression in the district,
see Poprzeczny, Hitler’s Man, 208.
In the occupied Soviet Union Wasser, Raumplanung, 61, 77; Schelvis, Vernichtungslager
Sobibór, 32, 41; Arad, Reinhard, 14; Tooze, Wages of Destruction, 468; Black, “Handlanger der
Endlösung,” 315. For the ethnic groups, see Black, “Askaris,” 290. Some western and Polish
historians inexcusably follow the ethnicizing Soviet propagandistic and current Russian
nationalist practice of referring to the Trawniki men as “Ukrainians.” Ukrainians were certainly
among these people, but so was everyone else whom the Germans asked, including of course
Russians.
From the west Poprzeczny, Hitler’s Man, 163, gives the figure of 94 staff from T-4; Berger, in
the now-standard Experten, gives 120. Kuwałek in Vernichtungslager gives a total staff count of
453.
The program of mass killing On the process, see Arad, Reinhard, 44, 56; Młynarczyk,
Judenmord, 252, 257, 260; Pohl, Verfolgung, 94.
The practice of extermination Rieger, Globocnik, 115.
Many Jews yielded Productive: FVA, 147, David L. Ten people: FVA, 404, Marion C.
Most likely there was never February 1942: Witte et al., Dienstkalender Heinrich Himmlers,
353. See Pohl, Verfolgung, 95; Friedländer, Extermination, 343, 430. The foundational study of
Operation Reinhard is Arad, Belzec. I provide descriptions of the murder at Treblinka in
Bloodlands.
In Warsaw in late December See Moczarski, Rozmowy, 200. The course and suppression of
the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising is discussed at greater length in Snyder, Bloodlands, chap. 9. See
especially Bartoszewski, Warszawski pierścień; Ringelblum, Polish-Jewish Relations; Engelking
and Leociak, Warsaw Ghetto; and, for a sense of how much work remains to be done on the
subject, Libionka and Weinbaum, Bohaterowie.
The man who suppressed Quotation: Kershaw, Final Solution, 66.
That winter, Jews Orpo: Curilla, Judenmord, 837. Lange: Kuwałek, Vernichtungslager, 49.
Stars of David: Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde, 686. See Mallmann, “Rozwiązać,” 85–95; Friedländer,
Extermination, 314–18.
In the General Government On the Łódż ghetto, see Löw, Juden im Getto Litzmannstadt.
Main task and dogs: Grabowski, Judenjagd, 9, 59.
In 1943 and 1944 Orpo responsibility: Browning, Ordinary Men, 121. Masses: Engelking and
Grabowski, Przestępczość, 195.
There was a politics Markiel and Skibińska, Zagłada domu, 23, 48. Posters: Cobel-Tokarska,
Bezludna wyspa, 90. See also Skibińska, “Self-Portrait,” 469–71; Engelking, Losy Żydów, 162,
188; Grabowski, Judenjagd, 24.
Poles were not always Krosno: Rączy, Pomóc Polaków, 44. Żbikowski, “Night Guard,” 513, 515,
517, 520, 524; Grabowski, Judenjagd, 82. Chronicle of collective reprisals: Madajczyk,
Hitlerowski terror, 9 and passim.
Sometimes Poles in the countryside Order: Engelking and Grabowski, Przestępczość, 194–
95. Engelking gives the example of a Polish policeman who refused to shoot a seven-year-old who

begged for death, and instead rescued the boy. Losy Żydów, 198. Examples of help in Rączy,
Pomóc Polaków; and Hempel, Pogrobowcy.
In these conditions Grabowski, Judenjagd, 11, 69. The notion of the privatization of power, an
Arendtian argument developed by Gross in Revolution from Abroad, might be useful applied in
other settings.
Wherever the state Some Dutch Jews were sent to Sobibór, which is one more way that the
Dutch situation resembles the Polish one. Almost all of the other victims of Sobibór were Polish
Jews. Most Dutch Jews were sent to Auschwitz.

8. The Auschwitz Paradox
Auschwitz has been a relatively See Longerich, Davon, 222 and passim; on property: Aly,
Hitler’s Beneficiaries.
For similar reasons Cf. Veidlinger, In the Shadow.
Auschwitz was one of the few See the final chapter of Snyder, Bloodlands.
In the history of the Holocaust More than two hundred thousand Polish Jews were murdered
at Auschwitz; they were the second largest victim group, after Hungarian Jews. The third largest
was non-Jewish Poles.
Auschwitz arose Steinbacher, Auschwitz, 27; Steinbacher, “Musterstadt,” 275, 293.
The purpose of Auschwitz On the development of the camps and death facilities at Auschwitz,
see Dwork and Van Pelt, Auschwitz, 166, 177, 219, 240, 275, 290, 293, 313, 326, 351.
Intuitions fail See Valentino, Final Solutions, 234 and passim; and Croes, “Holocaust in the
Netherlands,” 492; in another setting, Straus, Order of Genocide, 128. The level of antisemitism,
insofar as this can be ascertained, does not seem to correlate with Jewish death rates; what does
strongly correlate is the degree of state destruction. Helen Fein developed an asynchronous
argument similar to the one here in her valuable study Accounting for Genocide. Where she writes
of “the lack of counterauthorities resisting” German plans (90), I have sought in previous chapters
to describe the process and consequences of the destruction of those authorities as one of the
causes of the Holocaust as such. State destruction created opportunities for innovation,
decapitated and perverted existing institutions, and left fragments that could be deployed for
other purposes. But my findings certainly confirm her general case. As in so many other matters
the suggestion for further research was to be found in Hilberg, Destruction, 2:572–99. See also
Birnbaum, Prier, 130.
Estonia shared the fate Fate of leaders: Kaasik, “Political Repression,” 310. Fate of ministers:
Paavle, “Estonian Elite,” 393. See also Łossowski, Kraje bałtyckie, 46–55.
Soviet law was applied Penal code: Maripuu, “Political Arrests,” 326; Maripuu, “Deportations,”
363. 10,200: Weiss-Wendt, Murder Without Hatred, 40.
Double collaboration Weiss-Wendt, Murder Without Hatred, 131.
Former employees Ibid., 115–16.
In Estonia, as everywhere Ibid., 132. Lithuanian policemen and POW camps: Dieckmann,
Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:525.
The German occupation of Denmark Quotation: Haestrup, “Danish Jews,” 22. Vilhjálmsson
and Blüdnikow, “Rescue,” 3, 5, 7. Wiking: Wróblewski, Dywizja, 143–47. A field surgeon in that
unit was a certain German physician named Joseph Mengele. Alongside Estonians: Strassner,
Freiwillige, 15.
When the Final Solution Haestrup, “Danish Jews,” 23, 29.
There was a will A sober accounting of these events is Herbert, Best, 360–72.
Denmark’s neighbor Sweden German stance: Dwork and Van Pelt, Holocaust, 327. In
custody: Haestrup, “Danish Jews,” 52.
Jews who were Danish Vilhjálmsson and Blüdnikow, “Rescue,” 1, 3.
These lists of actions and absences Antisemitism in the states at war with Germany and in
the neutral states probably worsened rather than improved during the war; Americans, according

to one public opinion poll, considered Jews during the war a greater enemy than the Germans or
the Japanese. Nirenberg, Anti-Judaism, 457–58.
Citizenship is the name See chaps. 5 and 6 of Snyder, Bloodlands.
In states allied with Germany Frank’s decree of 15 October 1941 in Paulsson, Secret City, 67.
Compare to Moore, “Le context du sauvetage,” 285–86. In the Rzeszów region of the General
Government in occupied Poland, some two hundred Poles were executed for sheltering Jews. See
Rączy, Pomóc Polaków, 61.
Compare the fates of Victor Klemperer On Jews permitted to live in Nazi Germany, see
Longerich, Davon, 252–53. Quotation from Kassow, Rediscovering, 13.
Because Klemperer was Kassow, Rediscovering, 360. Bartoszewski makes the point about
Anne Frank: “Rozmowa,” 16. Cf. Fein, Accounting for Genocide, 33.
Legal discrimination On Schmid, see Wette, Feldwebel, 67.
Citizenship in modern states Soviet bureaucracy might seem to be an exception. But it is in
fact an exception that proves the rule. First, the Soviet state was not, constitutionally or in
practice, a traditional state bound by law. It was subordinate to the communist party, and thus in
the end to the subjective reading of history by party leaders. Second, in times of massive state
terror, such as 1937–1938, conventional Soviet legal practices were set aside in favor of a state of
emergency.
Even German bureaucracy Bloodstream: “Endlösung der Judenfrage,” in Pauer-Studer,
Rechtfertigungen, 439. Breitman notes that it was a major mass murderer, Bach-Zelewski, who
began the intellectual association of death with bureaucracy. “Himmler,” 446. Wasserstein
provides the startling example of a Jewish bureaucracy, a council to aid Jewish emigration, that in
personnel and in mode of operation was similar to the Judenrat of Amsterdam. What changed in
the meantime was the arrival of the German state destroyers, who had created a stateless zone to
which Dutch Jews were now sent. Westerbork, at first a refugee camp, became a transit camp for
death facilities in occupied Poland. See his Ambiguity, passim.
Bureaucracies in Germany Gerlach, “Failure of Plans,” 68.

9. Sovereignty and Survival
Germany invaded Yugoslavia See Manoschek, Serbien, 39, 51, 55, 79, 86, 107, 186; and
Pawlowitch, New Disorder, 281.
Croatia as a state had no hope Korb, Im Schatten, 439–49 for summary of major findings; see
also Korb, “Mass Violence,” 73; Dulic, “Mass Killing,” 262, 273.
Slovakia was the other Ward, Priest, Politician, Collaborator, 209, 214, 221.
Slovakia joined the Axis Himmler and 20 October 1941 meeting: Witte et al., Dienstkalender
Heinrich Himmlers, 278. See generally Ward, Priest, Politician, Collaborator, 227, 230, 233, 235.
Romania, Germany’s major Tradition of “securitized” Jewish policy: Iordachi, “Juden,” 110.
Romania had been regarded On Romanianization, see Livezeanu, Cultural Politics.
Traditionally Romania had been See Geissbühler, Blutiger Juli, 46, 49.
When on July 2, 1941 Deportation figures: Olaru-Cemiertan, “Wo die Züge,” 224. Iasi and
43,500: Geissbühler, Blutiger Juli, 54, 119.
The Romanian political Solonari, “Patterns,” 121, 124, 130, “killing all Jews” quotation at 125.
“Nobody except Jews”: Dumitru, “Through the Eyes,” 125. See also Prusin, Lands Between, 154.
Romanian soldiers quickly Glass, Deutschland, 144–47, 266–67; Dumitru, “Through the
Eyes,” 206–13; Geissbühler, “He spoke Yiddish.”
From the perspective of Bucharest Numbers and analysis: Glass, Deutschland, 15. See also
Hilberg, Destruction, 2:811; Bloxham, Final Solution, 116.
Romanian policy Ancel, Holocaust in Romania, 479, 486; Solonari, “Ethnic Cleansing,” 105–6,
113. Hitler trying: Hillgruber, “Grundläge,” 290. Diplomatic protection: Glass, Deutschland, 230.
Under their longtime ruler For a convincing analysis, see Case, Between States, especially
182–88. For an example, see Antonescu’s conversation with Hitler on 23 March 1944, cited in
Staatsmänner, 392.
Budapest passed anti-Jewish Forty thousand: Lower, “Axis Collaboration,” 194.
The expropriation Gerlach and Aly, Letzte Kapitel, 81, 83, 104, 114, 126, 148, 188–89. New
York Times: Bajohr and Pohl, Der Holocaust, 115.
Like all of Germany’s allies Ungváry, Siege of Budapest, 286–91; Segal, “Beyond,” 16; Kenez,
Coming of the Holocaust, 244–48, 257. 320,000: Pohl, Verfolgung, 107. Arrow Cross: Jangfeldt,
Hero of Budapest, 240.
Jews who were citizens Kenez comes to a similar conclusion: Coming of the Holocaust, 234.
When the war turned 29 April: Kershaw, Fateful Choices, 469. “Weltvergifter aller Völker”:
Hillgruber, “Gründlage,” 296.
Hitler was seeking to lift Cf. Bloxham, Final Solution, 7; Ther, Ciemna strona, 19.
Hitler was not Changing character of USSR: Table Talk, 587, 657, 661; Hitler to Antonescu, 26
March 1944, in Staatsmänner, 398. Stronger man: Steinberg, “Third Reich,” 648; Kershaw, The
End, 290; see also Jäckel, Hitler in History, 89.
Here, as with Estonia Van der Boom, “Ordinary Dutchmen,” 32, 42. Van der Boom argues that
Dutch Jews were killed in such large numbers because they feared hiding more than deportation.
As he points out, a Jew who tried to hide was sixty times more likely to survive in the Netherlands
than a Jew who did not. But punishment for hiding was not unique to the Netherlands, and Jews
survived in higher numbers elsewhere in German-dominated Europe without going into hiding.

The fear of hiding might indeed be a special Dutch circumstance, but it cannot alone explain why a
higher percentage of Dutch Jews were killed than, say, German or Romanian Jews. On Dutch
antisemitism, see Wasserstein, Ambiguity, 22.
The Netherlands was, for several reasons Kwiet, Reichskommissariat Niederlande, 51–52.
Amsterdam was the only Michman, Emergence, 95, 99; Moore, Victims and Survivors, 191,
193, 195, 200; de Jong, Netherlands and Nazi Germany, 12–13; Griffioen and Zeller,
“Comparing,” 64.
The situation of rescuers Romijn, “ ‘Lesser Evil,’ ” 13, 14, 17, 20, 22; Griffioen and Zeller,
“Comparing,” 59.
The murder of Greek Jews Mazower, Salonica, 392–96. On the cemetery, see Saltier,
“Dehumanizing,” 20, 27; for more direct German material interests, consult Aly, Hitler’s
Beneficiaries, 251–56.
In the first weeks Mazower, Salonica, 402–3. This account of the war in Greece follows
generally Mazower, Inside Hitler’s Greece, 1, 14, 18, 20, 235, 238, 240, 244, 250, 251, 259, and
Rodogno, Fascism’s European Empire, 364, 390.
The French case Hitler quotation, Vichy’s foreign recognition, and number of civil servants:
Rousso, Vichy, 15, 47. See also Birnbaum, Sur la corde raide, 252.
France did introduce Rousso, Vichy, 79–81. Madagascar: Marrus and Paxton, Vichy, 14, 60,
113. Same people: Bruttman, Au bureau, 199–201. I cannot enter here into the interesting issue of
relationships between the French state’s treatment of its Jewish and Muslim subjects. See Surkis,
Sexing the Citizen; Shepard, Invention.
The reasoning behind 7,055: Personal communication from Patrick Weil, 11 October 2012; on
the denaturalization process see his How to Be French, 87–122. Camps in France in 1939 and
1940: Grynberg, Les camps, 11, 35 and passim.
Under the Vichy regime Paris and Drancy: Wieviorka and Laffitte, Drancy, 21, 106, 118–19.
French and German policies Ibid., 120, 209.
In summer 1942 Weil, How to Be French, 122; Rousso, Vichy, 92–93.
The decisive matter See Marrus and Paxton, Vichy, 325. The case of Belgium, where 60 percent
of the Jews present survived, is midway between the Netherlands and France. The occupation was
crucially military rather than civilian, as in France. The sovereign remained in the country, unlike
the Netherlands. In Belgium, unlike in France but like the Netherlands, the Germans were able to
place their own people atop the police. Like France, in Belgium there were a large number of Jews
who were not citizens; unlike in France they were not specially targeted by a sovereign authority.
Unlike in the Netherlands, however, the Germans did not assemble a large police force of their
own. Belgian Jews seem to have been better informed than Dutch Jews about the meaning of
deportation; thus Van der Boom’s explanation of the unwillingness of Dutch Jews to go into
hiding would not apply to Belgian Jews. See Griffioen and Zeller, “Comparing,” 54–64; also
Conway, Collaboration, 24; Fein, Accounting, 156–67.
The Holocaust in France Rousso, Vichy, 93. Thronged: Marrus and Paxton, Vichy, 85, also
364. Soviet citizenship: Sémelin, Persécution et entraides, 208–9.
Considerably more Polish Jews Klarsfeld gives 26,300 Polish and 24,000 French Jews. Many
of the 5,000 he classifies as Soviet would have been Polish Jews who took Soviet citizenship after
the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact. Le mémorial, 19.

10. The Grey Saviors
In the world that Hitler According to Otto Ohlendorf, the commander of Einsatzgruppe D,
Himmler said that responsibility rested with Himmler and Hitler alone. See Rzanna,
“Eksterminacja.”
Every Jew who survived Cf. Dwork and Van Pelt, Holocaust, 348.
Almost every Jew Hanna Krall recalls forty-five people who helped her, in one way or another.
Bartoszewski and Lewinówna, Ten jest, 299.
In Einsatzgruppe D Christian Ingrao has developed this theme, especially in his Les chasseurs
noirs.
In 1938 in Germany Los Altos Town Crier, 15 April 2009; Ralph Bernstein, personal
communication, 15 April 2013; Justiz und NS-Verbrechen, vol. 37, 2007, Lfd. Nr. 777, 397, 398,
405, 407–9, 417, 431, 438, 439; Angrick, Besatzungspolitik, 422. About twenty-six thousand Jews
were sent to camps in November 1938. Goeschel and Wachsmann, Introduction, 28.
Most German Jews emigrated Rumbula: Michel’son, Ia perezhila, 84.
No one can know See Snyder, “Commemorative Causality.”
Only about three percent For this and other reckoning, see Snyder, Bloodlands. Experience:
Głowiński, Black Seasons, 170.
The degree of statelessness Bremen police: Bremens Polizei, 124. See also Russ, “Wer war
verantwortlich,” 486, 494, 503. Cf. Browning, Ordinary Men, 165, 202.
A lesser known Maubach, “Expansion weiblicher Hilfe,” 93–94.
A few German women Koslov, Gewalt im Dienstalltag, 482–84.
Further east Lower, Hitler’s Furies, 163 and passim, for all of the conceptual issues.
If statelessness drew YIVO, RG 720, Hirshant Papers, 1/52, Syda Konis. For meditations on
forced labor, see Pollack, Warum; Buber-Neumann, Under Two Dictators, 331.
The end of states Body and soul: Hryciuk, Polacy we Lwowie, 59.
In eastern Europe Matz, “Sweden,” 106–9; Jangfeldt, Hero of Budapest, 161. Fifteen thousand
to twenty thousand is the estimate in Dwork and Van Pelt, Holocaust, 316–18.
Wallenberg, an exceptional One exception is the French case of Le Chambonsur-Lignon.
One such man Chan, “Ho Feng-Shan,” 1–15, quotations at 5 and 15.
After the German occupation See Wasserstein, Ambiguity, 165; McAuley, “Decision,” 4, 7, 32;
Fralon, Good Man, 60, 79.
A diplomatic rescuer April 1940 number: Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 1:145.
In the 1930s For Daszkiewicz’s memoir see MWP, Kolekcja Rybikowskiego, syg. 6233 [Leszek
Daszkiewicz], “Placówka wyw. “G,” 3, 4, 7–10, 18, 21, 22. On Rybikowski, see Pięciach, “Szpieg ze
Sztokholmu” and for background, see Dubicki, Nałęcz, and Stirling, Polsko-brytyjska współpraca
wywiadowcza, 100, 305, 342.
One of Rybikowski’s MWP, Kolekcja Rybikowskiego, syg. 6233 [Leszek Daszkiewicz],
“Placówka wyw. ‘G,’ ” 21.
The scheme that the Polish MWP, Kolekcja Rybikowskiego, syg. 6233 [Leszek Daszkiewicz],
“Placówka wyw. ‘G,’ ” 22.
In the chaos Quotations here from MWP, syg. 1675, Sugihara memoir, 9; Rybikowski’s memoir,

at MWP, Kolekcja Rybikowskiego, syg. 6233 [Leszek Daszkiewicz], “Placówka wyw. ‘G,’ ” 70.
Once they had done MWP, Kolekcja Rybikowskiego, syg. 6233 [Leszek Daszkiewicz],
“Placówka wyw. ‘G,’ ” 50–52, 64, 67. On Sugihara, his colleagues, and his actions, see also
Pepłoński, Wywiad, 231–33; Kuromiya and Pepłoński, Mitędzy Warszawą a Tokio, 393; Levine,
Sugihara, 117, 132, 218, 273; Sakamoto, Japanese Diplomats, 107, 114, 395.
When Nazi Germany See Gross, Revolution from Abroad; Gross and Grudeińska-Gross, War
Through Children’s Eyes; and Snyder, Bloodlands, chap. 4.
The arrival of these Begin, Revolt, 25; Drymmer, “Zagadnienie,” 74; Korboński, “Unknown
Chapter,” 377. On Begin and the Polish army in Palestine: “Palestine: Counter Intelligence:
Menahem Begin,” 24 September 1937, NA, KV/2/2251/50a. Uniform and other details of journey:
Shilon, Menachem Begin, 40–45.
Now that the war Shilon, Menachem Begin, 48. Meridor in Poland: Bell, Terror Out of Zion,
44–45. Lankin: Bell, Terror Out of Zion, 111. Nechmad and Lankin: Niv, M’arkhot ha-Irgun, 172.
Lankin’s memoir is To Win; on the Polish encounter 31–40. Meridor confirmed that he was
number two under British interrogation: NA, KV/2/2251/14a.
During the Second World War These interactions are well described in Davies, Rising ’44. On
the reaction of Varsovians to the flight, see Biskupska, “Extermination and the Elite.”
The Polish government in London Crushing majority: “Prosze przyjąć jako fakt zupełnie
realny że przygniatająca wiékszość kraju jest nastrojona antysemicko.” Cited in Skibińska and
Szuchta, Wybór żródeł, 397. For a sober analysis, see Brakel, “Was There a ‘Jewish
Collaboration’?”
All the same See Puławski, W obliczu Zagłady, 412 and passim; also Engelking and Leociak,
Warsaw Ghetto, 667; and Engel, Facing a Holocaust.
On November 27, 1942 10 and 17 December: Stola, Nadzieja, 174; Bartoszewski, Warsaw
Ghetto, 49. Times: Bajohr and Pohl, Der Holocaust, 99; “Extermination” and moment of silence:
Saviello, “Policy,” 1, 24, 27.
This warning, issued Significance: Fein, Accounting, 77.
The availability of plausible Secretary of Drymmer: Jan Karski, “Dziecko sanacji,” Tygodnik
Powszechny, 24 April 2012. Cf. Żbikowski, Karski, 10–11.
Upon his return to Poland Severe: “przeważnie bezwzględny, często bezlitośny,” cited in
Skibińska and Szuchta, Wybór żródeł, 390. See Ringelblum, Polish-Jewish Relations, 77; Leder,
Rewolucja, 23, 44; Bartov, “Eastern Europe,” 575. Also worth considering is Thomas Bernhard’s
Heldenplatz, especially at 112.
Most of the Jews FVA, 1107, Jan K.
In October 1942 Ibid. On Karski and his missions see Karski, Story of a Secret State; and
Żbikowski, Karski.
The concentration camp Auschwitz Another English translation in Pilecki, Auschwitz
Volunteer, 13. The Polish original can currently be found at http://​www.​polandpolska.​org/​
dokumenty/​witold/​raport-​witolda-​1945.​htm. German translation of the Polish original by Jan
Skorup at http://pileckibericht.wordpress.com. Numbers: Bartoszewski, Warszawski pierścień,
124.
Pilecki was a patriot The passage is in Pilecki, Auschwitz Volunteer, 175; I translate here the
Polish original.
Some 28,000 Jews 28,000 and 11,600: Paulsson, Secret City, 2, 5, 209, 212. 4,000:
Bartoszewski and Lewinówna, Ten jest, 28. Joint and money belts: Bartoszewski, “Rozmowa,” 35;
Bartoszewski, Warsaw Ghetto, 59.
Among Żegota’s leaders PPS: Bartoszewski, Warsaw Ghetto, 46. Individuals: Prekerowa,

Konspiracyjna Rada, 69–75.
At the same time On Kossak and the debate over antisemitic rescuers, see Podolska, “Poland’s
Antisemitic Rescuers.” See also Cała, Antysemitizm, 447. Rescue of human beings rather than
Jews: also a finding of Tec, When Light, 176. Nucleus: Paulsson, Secret City, 26, 40; PelegMariańska and Peleg, “Witnesses,” 11; Oliner, Altruistic Personality, 6, 142.
Like Pilecki, Karski, and Bartoszewski Prekerowa, “Komórka,” 521–25, 531.
After the war was over The phenomenon of assimilated Jews helping other Jews was, at least
in Warsaw, not uncommon. Another form of Jewish self-help that saved lives was organization
inside the Warsaw ghetto. See Sakowska, Ludzie, 117–86.

11. Partisans of God and Man
Anszel Sznajder and his brother ŻIH, 301/2953.
The Sznajder brothers The point is made in Croes, “Pour une approche quantitative,” 95.
This bloody irony The complex histories of Jews in the Warsaw Uprising of 1944 are presented
in Engelking and Libionka, Żydzi w powstańczej Warszawie. Amsterdam comparison: Paulsson,
Secret City, 230.
The Soviet partisans See Brakel, “ ‘Das allergefährlichste,’ ” 403–16; Musial, Sowjetische
Partisanen, 189, 202; Verbrechen der Wehrmacht, 495; Slepyan, Stalin’s Guerrillas, 157.
Some distinguished soldiers On Józewski, see Snyder, Sketches; and his own memoir at BUW
DR 3189. Długoborska: Bartniczak, From Andrzejowo to Pecynka, 138–40; Gawin, “Pensjonat.”
Koźmiński: Bartoszewski and Lewinówna, Ten jest, 310. Gieruła: Stanisław and Lusia Igeł, in
Rączy, Pomóc Polaków, 280. Stanisław Igeł was in the Home Army.
The Home Army also carried Papers: FVA, 414, Alice H.; FVA, 538, Norman L.; FVA, 2700,
Maria M. Woliński: Libionka, “ZWZ-AK,” 36. On the Biuletyn Informacyjny: Libionka, “ZWZAK,” 39, 43.
Thousands of Jews either joined Weapons from Home Army: Libionka, “ZWZ-AK,” 57, 69.
Quotation: Engelking and Libionka, Żydzi w powstańczej Warszawie, 91.
In the opening days of the Warsaw Kopka, Konzentrationslager Warschau, 82–115.
The Home Army was a continuation Bandits and death sentences: Libionka, “ZWZ-AK,”
119–23.
The myth of Judeobolshevism Libionka, “ZWK-AK,” 136.
In villages where communism Nurse: Ełzbieta Burda, ŻIH, 301/2407.
Though communist ideology On recruitment of murderers, see generally Slepyan, Stalin’s
Guerrillas, 209. Amnesty: Penter, Kohle, 273. On Brins’kyi, see his Po toï bik frontu. Worry of
Ukrainian nationalists: OUN v svitli, 82. Policeman and girlfriend: ŻIH, 301/2879. On the highly
complex methods used by the Soviet partisans, see Burds, “Agentura”; Armstrong, Soviet
Partisans; see also Gazeta Wyborcza, 15 April 2002.
Jews who knew the local terrain ŻIH, 301/717. For other examples of side switching, see
Musial, Sowjetische Partisanen, 266–67. Jews also recruited Poles to the Soviet partisans; see the
case of Mojżesz Edelstein in ŻIH, 301/810.
Not every local Jew working For another example of a Jewish recruiter, see ŻIH 301/1795.
For encounters with antisemitism, see ŻIH, 301/53, Abram Leder; ŻIH, 301/299, Zoja Bajer; ŻIH,
301/1046, Lazar Bromberg. See also Dieckmann, Deutsche Besatzungspolitik, 2:1469. For general
reflections, see Weiner, Making Sense, 376–382.
Nevertheless, the Soviet partisans Jewish and non-Jewish communists: Jakub Grinsberg,
ŻIH, 301/305. Max: Zoja Bajer, ŻIH, 301/299. The punitive expedition: ŻIH, 301 5737, Rena Guz.
A substantial number of the Jewish German liquidations in Volhynia: A striking record is
the inventory of gasoline and oil used exclusively for travel from ghetto to ghetto to murder
remaining Jews. “Ausgabeliste,” DAVO, Fond R-2, Opis 2, Delo 196. Volhynian Jewish partisans,
male and female: ŻIH, 301/299; ŻIH, 301/718; ŻIH, 301/719; ŻIH, 301/1811. On family camps see
Arad, “Original Form.” Feeling of the deed: Aron Perław, ŻIH, 301/955. Each dead German: Leon
Jarszun, ŻIH, 301/1487.

One such person was Tuvia Bielski On Bielski, see Tec, Defiance, 5, 40, 63, 80, 110, 145, 185,
208.
This powerful myth could admit Chess and disarmament: Libionka, “ZWZ-AK,” 112. Correct
understanding: Slepyan, Stalin’s Guerrillas, 210.
Although the Polish army 592: Petrow, Psy Stalina, 223. Seventeen thousand: Gurianov,
“Obzor,” 205.
Between 1945 and 1949 For surveys, see Simons, Eastern Europe; and Applebaum, Iron
Curtain.
Polish soldiers who had spent Executions: Skarga, Penser, 28. Double collaboration at the
end of the war: Skibińska, “Self-Portrait,” 459; Grabowski, Judenjagd, 93, 109; Gross, Sąsiedzi,
115.
Any Marxist could have explained For articles that are suggestive of some of these
interpretations, see Abrams, “Second World War”; and Gross, “Social Consequences.”
The Soviets entered a country On the Soviet and communist Polish attitudes to the
Holocaust, see especially Kostyrchenko, Gosudarstvennyi antisemitizm; Brandenberger, “Last
Crime”; Szaynok, Polska a Izrael; Shore, “Język.” For a longer discussion see Snyder, Bloodlands,
chap. 11.
Poles who had rescued Jews Hulanicki: The case is made in Ginor and Remez, “Casualty.”
Wallenberg: The latest evidence is in Matz, “Cables in Cipher.”
The Sheptyts’kyi brothers See Hentosh, “Pro vstavlennia,” 318–25, and Motyka, Cień Kłyma
Sawura, 80–82, for these details; the state of the art is Himka, “Metropolitan Andrei Sheptytsky.”
For the experiences of rescued children see Rotfeld, W cieniu, 53–54, 88; Kahane, Lvov Ghetto
Diary, 118–55; Lewin, Przeżyłem, 155–59.
Yet the Greek Catholic Church On the origins of the Uniate Church, see Gudziak, Crisis and
Reform, 209–22 and passim; Koialovich, Tserkovnaia uniia, 1:166–68 and passim.
In 1918, the Habsburg monarchy On Galicia, Ukraine, Poland, and Sheptyts’kyi, see Snyder,
Reconstruction, chap. 3; Snyder, Red Prince, chap. 3; Himka, Religion and Nationality; Jobst,
Zwischen Nationalismus und Internationalismus.
In its experience of alienation The case is made in Braun and Tammes, “Religious Deviance,”
3, 11; Cabanel, “Protestantismes minoritaires,” 455. On Germany, see Ericksen, Complicity, 95
and passim.
By contrast, church leaders On the famous French example of Le Chambon-sur-Lignon, see
Sémelin, Persécutions, 717–37.
In the occupied Soviet Union Baptist rescue: Spektor, “Zydzi wołyńscy,” 577; Spector,
“Holocaust,” 243; ŻIH, 301/397, Jakub and Esia Zybelberg, Hersz and Doba Mełamud. See also
Sefer Lutsk, testimony of Fanye Pasht; Ringelblum, Polish-Jewish Relations, 242. Lea Goldberg
and the Shtundists: ŻIH, 301/1011; also Siemaszko and Siemaszko, Ludobójstwo, 793. Cf.
Cabanel, “Protestantismes minoritaires,” 446.
The dominant Roman Catholic Church On the tortuous reconsiderations, see Connelly,
From Enemy to Brother.
Wilm Hosenfeld, a Roman Confino, World Without Jews, 198.
Aleksandra Ogrodzińska, a Polish ŻIH, 301/2502, Wala Kuźniecow.
Wonders and visions threaten YIVO, Hirshant Papers, 3/206.
For the nuns in their convents Ringelblum, Polish-Jewish Relations, 226.
Rufeisen was taken This account is compiled from ŻIH, 301/3726 (also classified as ŻIH,
301/2827) and FVA, 1834; quotation from the former.

Andrei Sheptyts’kyi Sheptyts’kyi: Motyka, Cień Kłyma Sawura, 86. Iwaniuk: YIVO, Hirshant
Papers, 3/206. Priest and Polish Roman Catholics: Rączy, Pomóc Polaków, 253, 100.

12. The Righteous Few
Ita Straż, a young woman Tomkiewicz, Zbrodnia w Ponarach, 203. Vova Gdud survived
Ponary in the same way. He was helped in the first cottage. See Good, “Yerushalayim,” 17–18.
Who lives in the fourth For a typical and eloquent record of being turned away multiple times,
see Pese Kharzhevski-Zlotnik, “Di Kristlekhe ‘hilf’ far di Kolbutsker yidn,” in Yasni, Sefer
Klobutsk, 247–49.
Later Zelda was denounced YIVO, RG 104/MK547/7/200, Zelda Machlowicz-Hinenberg.
At that point the host YIVO, RG 104/II/5, Alicja Gornowski.
A wife might save Rubenstein and Altman, Unknown Black Book, 60–61. See Fogelman,
Conscience, 260.
Love for children could also Romantic relationships that provided a structure for rescue
could, of course, be homosexual, as in the case of the rescue of a Jew by a Polish Roman Catholic
priest and his Ukrainian partner. See generally Paulsson, Secret City, 44.
One day when Katarzyna ŻIH, 301/1959.
Maria was now working YIVO, RG 104/MK538/1072.
Men sometimes took in children Seweryn: ŻIH, 301/2259. Jeromiński: ŻIH, 301/1468.
After climbing out ŻIH, 301/2877.
The last major transports For the case, see Ostałowka, Farby wodne. On the death marches,
see Blatman, Death Marches.
And then, after a moment USHMM, RG-68.102M/2007.372/21/206–47.
In the invasion Cf. Engelking, Losy Żydów, 117.
Noema Centnewschwer Noema Centnewschwer: ŻIH, 301/2750. Chawa Rozensztejn: ŻIH,
301/1272. On prewar Łomża, see Gnatowski, “Niepokorni,” 156–57.
Szyja Flejsz was a boy On his life: ŻIH, 301/2739. On the problem of competitive recruitment:
TsDAVO, 3833/1/87; AW II/1321/2K; AW II/1328/2K.
The commanders of the UPA On the origins of the UPA and its mass killing of Poles, see
Snyder, “Origins”; and, above all, Motyka, Od rzezi. On its motivations, the primary sources are
bountiful; see, for example, TsDAVO, 3833/1/86/19–20; TsDAVO, 3833/1/131/13–14. Soviet
interrogation protocols offer confirmatory evidence: for example, Protokol Doprosa, I. I. Iavorskii,
14 April 1944, GARF, fond R-9478, opis 1, delo 398. For the rescue of a Pole by a Jew, see FVA, T1645. On the Soviet continuation of the Ukrainian nationalist project, see Snyder, Reconstruction
of Nations, chaps. 8–10.
All of the surviving residents ŻIH, 301/2739; Siemaszko and Siemaszko, Ludobójstwo, 280.
For additional information on Woronówka, which no longer exists, see http://wolyn.ovh.org.
These partings are a wrenching subject, very present in the sources. See Shore, Taste of Ashes.
Sometimes people who loved the children they rescued encouraged them to go, following the same
moral instincts that instructed them in the first place. And sometimes they later regretted it.
Seeing the peasant’s reaction ŻIH, 301/3598.
The Pole who owned the land ŻIH, 301/451.
The man approaching her ŻIH, 301/946.
Other rescuers, with more See Fogelman, Conscience, 73, 140.
Rena Krainik found herself ŻIH, 301/6035.

In the city of Stanisławów On Janina Ciszewska, see ŻIH, 301/2514; 301/2515; 301/4362.
When he received a request ŻIH, 301/6335.
Good people broke ŻIH, 301/1263.
The nature of an encounter ŻIH, 301/2270.
What Jewish survivors Bauman: Cobel-Tokarska, Bezludna wyspa, 76. Joseph Co: FVA, 1065.
Agnieszka Wróbel, who YIVO, RG 104/MK536/1064, Bronisława Znider.
If Jews had little to say Olha R.: FVA, 3268. Cf. Fogelman, Conscience, xvi, 6.
Helena Chorążyńska, an uneducated Chorążyńska: MJH, 1984.T. 137. Cywiński and
Żuławska: Bartoszewski and Lewinówna, Ten jest, 300, 330. Zboromiski: YIVO, RG
104/MK538/1066. Schmid: Wette, Feldwebel, 25, 27, letter at 121.
Karolina Kobylec: “That is just” “Mam już taki charakter.” Bartoszewski and Lewinówna, Ten
jest, 318.
Jan Lipke was a Latvian Lipke: USHMM, RG-68.102M/2007.372/21/165–205. Beyond the
limits: Silberman, “Jan Lipke,” 100. Most normal thing: MJH, 1987.T.65. This confirms a finding
of Monroe, Compassion, 221, and de Jong, Netherlands and Nazi Germany, 21. Cf. Arendt: “only
‘exceptions’ could be expected to act ‘normally.’ ” Eichmann, 26.
Deep in the forests A peasant who gambled a bit more than usual might also be thought to be
taking money from Jews. See Good, “Yerushalayim,” 38.
Rescuers were risking USHMM, RG-31.049.01.
Miron Lisikiewicz, who Lisikiewicz: Rączy, Pomóc Polaków, 282. Sewer worker: USHMM,
RG-68.102M/2007.372/29/2027–164. Kawka: YIVO, RG 104/MK538/1053. Ringelblum: PolishJewish Relations, 226. Lipke and money: USHMM, RG-68.102M/2007.372/16/150–63. On the
issue of money and risk, see also the recollections of Blanche C. and Liubov Svershinskaia at FVA,
262, and USHMM, RG38/49/70, respectively. See also Tec, When Light, 88.
It is true that many Cf. Gross, Golden Harvest, 81.
Within this set of incentives Ringelblum, Polish-Jewish Relations, 77, 121; Grabowski,
Judenjagd, 136; Good, “Yerushalayim,” 18.
In the darkest of times I was led to this formulation by a paper on Teresa Prekerowa by
Jadwiga Biskupska. Similar conclusions are reached by Tec, When Light, 154; Oliner, Altruistic
Personality, 6; Fogelman, Conscience, 58. A profound study by a historian who was once a
rescued child leads in the same direction: Redlich, Together and Apart.

Conclusion: Our World
In the small photograph Wanda Grosmanowa-Jedlicka: Bartoszewski and Lewinówna, Ten
jest, 487. At least fifteen thousand Warsaw Jews never entered the ghetto. See Kermish,
“Activities,” 374.
Most of the Jews of Warsaw Grossman, Life and Fate, 409. He continues: “Kindness is
powerful only while it is powerless.” See Monroe, Compassion, 258.
Wanda J.’s judgment Compare Bauer, The Death of the Shtetl, 97.
Science in fact possesses At a methodological level, I have opposed forms of historical writing
that permit exits into prior emotional convictions or newfound teleological comfort. That said, on
the substantial issue of the relationship between technique and experience, I am with the Kantians
and against Heidegger. For a close historical examination of a crucial debate: Gordon, Continental
Divide, on the issues most pertinent to this study at 15, 17, 31, 35, 217, 220, 225, 238. The rapid
conquest: Hitler was formed by but did not partake in the age of the frontier. See Webb, Great
Frontier, 280. Even the German victories over the Herero were due in part to the spread of
disease in cattle. See Levene, Rise, 247.
When science is disengaged Food prices: Evenson, “Economic Consequences,” 473. See also
Federico, “Natura Non Fecit Saltus,” 24. For a history of these improvements, see Olmstead and
Rhode, Creating Abundance, especially 64–66 and 388–98.
At precisely this point Mazower, Hitler’s Empire, 594. Cf. Maier, Unmasterable Past, 7: “For
almost four decades the Federal Republic has lived, so to speak, by bread alone.” Also Bartov,
Mirrors of Destruction, 167: “Studying the Holocaust is the best means to prevent its
mystification.” On the special 1950s: Federico, “Natura Non Fecit Saltus,” 21. Consider the word
“calorie,” which in the West almost always means something of which people get too much. In the
1930s, people and planners counted calories to ensure that a household had enough of them to
survive, or that laboring men, women, and animals received enough of them to power the
economy.
The Green Revolution China net importer: Aliyu, “Agricultural Development.” Few months’
supply: Denison, Darwinian Agriculture, 11. Food riots: Moyo, Winner Take All, 109.
Though the world is not Of course, simple deprivation of food is bad enough; in the world of
today, a child starves to death every five seconds. Ziegler, Betting on Famine, xiii.
It seems reasonable to worry Cf. Gumbrecht, Nach 1945, 245, 264, 305. See also Rousso, La
dernière catastrophe; Berger, After the End.
The planet is changing Internal combustion engines and factories produce gases that trap the
sun’s heat within the atmosphere. The ongoing destruction of forests and wetlands accelerates this
warming, since plants absorb carbon dioxide and emit oxygen. A mass of global data demonstrates
an increase in annual minimum temperatures of the surface of the earth, of the air at the surface
of the earth, of the higher atmosphere, and of the surface of the oceans. Causality: Maslin, Global
Warming, 1, 4, 57. Temperatures and causality: Alexander, “Global Observed Changes,” 31;
Rohde, “A New Estimate,” 22; Rohde, “Averaging Process,” 1; Zhang, “Detection of Human
Influence,” 461. Predictions too modest: Rahmsdorf, “Comparing Climate Projections,” 1;
Economist, 22 September 2012; Guardian, 27 November 2012. Nonlinear effects: Maslin, Global
Warming, 112, 116; Mitchell, “Extreme Events,” 2217; Latif, “El Niño,” 20853. The basic point
about regionalism in Pitman, Arneth, and Ganzeveld, “Regionalizing,” 332. Species: Maslin,
Global Warming, 99; also Clarke, “From Genes to Ecosystems,” 6. Coastlines: Cayan, “Climate

Change Projections,” S71; Helmuth, “Hidden Signals,” 191; Rahmsdorf, “Comparing Climate
Projections,” 1. Storms: Tebaldi, “Modelling Sea Level Rise,” 1. For an extremely impressive
history of climate change in an earlier period, see Parker, Global Crisis.
Perhaps the experience Cf. Tooze, Wages of Destruction, 477, 544, 549. As Mount points out,
realist theories of international politics will have to account for the real changes on our real
planet: “Arctic Wake-up Call,” 10.
Hitler was a child First globalization: Trentmann: “Coping with Shortage,” 15, 22, and passim;
Federico, “Natura Non Fecit Saltus,” 23. Most affected: Brown and Crawford, “Climate Change,” 2.
Useful in the future will be Kiernan’s reminder that all historical episodes of mass killing are
connected in one way or another to an account of the value of land. Blood and Soil, especially
chap. 4.
Mass killing in Rwanda The exhaustion of: New York Times, 14 December 1989. 1993:
Campbell, “Population Pressure,” 2. Overpopulation and land motivation: Newbury,
“Background,” 13. Land motivation: Rose, “Land and Genocide,” 64. Organization: Stanton,
“Could the Rwandan,” 211–15; Hintjens, “Explaining,” 249, 261, 270. Organization and numbers:
Straus, “How Many Perpetrators,” 86–87. Loyalty to group: Sémelin, Purifier, 314.
The starvation in Somalia Moyo, Winner Take All, 32–33; Economist, 21 May 2009;
Brautigam, “Land Rights”; Horta, “Zambezi Valley.” 60 percent of world’s untilled arable land:
Economist, 4 September 2013. Madagascar: Ziegler, Betting on Famine, 200.
One Asian country exhibits Land and water: Diamond, Collapse, 362–65. Hectares: Moyo,
Winner Take All, 29. Famine: Dikötter, Mao’s Great Famine; Yang, Calamity and Reform, 21–42.
In twenty-first-century China As during the drought of 2010: Sternberg, “Chinese Drought,”
8. Sensitivity: Ziegler, Betting on Famine, 41.
Facing some future crisis Sudan: Reeves, Dying, 3. Chinese involvement: Doriye, “Next
stage,” 25; King, “Factoring Environmental Security,” 151. See also Zafar, “Growing Relationship,”
119.
China also faces Tropical regions and water cycle: Stern, Economics of Climate Change, 70, 74.
Water shortages: Sullivan, “National Security,” 15–16. General crisis by 2050, current shortages,
riots: Solomon, Water, 368, 370, 371. China: King, “Factoring Environmental Security,” 104;
Moyo, Winner Take All, 41; Stern, Economics of Climate Change, 78; Solomon, Water, 440.
Less peaceful approaches to the problem Russia: Blank, “Dead End”; Kaczmarski,
“Domestic Sources”; Lotspeich, “Economic Integration.” Test case of relations: Eder, ChinaRussia, 130–131.
Yet as climate change In 2007, the number of Chinese in low-elevation coastal zones was
estimated at 11 percent of the population; if that percentage held in 2015 the figure would be about
149 million. The entire population of Russia is about 145 million. McGranahan, Balk, and
Anderson, “Rising Tide,” 26.
None of these Chinese Voluntary targets: New York Times, 11 November 2014.
Russian governments of the early On Russian revenue from hydrocarbons: Gustafson, Wheel
of Fortune, 1, 5.
In a new Russian colonialism, For maps see the newspaper Novorossiia, for example 1
August 2014.
President Vladimir Putin of Russia See Riabov and Riabova, “Decline of Gayropa?” For a
chronicle of Russian policy to Ukraine in 2013 and 2014, see my forty or so articles in English,
French, and German as collected on timothysnyder.org or in Ukrainian or Russian translation in
the editions listed in the bibliography.
As Russia demonstrated I discussed this connection in several of the publications cited above,

as well as in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung of 15 December 2014. Many of the fundamental
connections were drawn by Anton Shekhovtsov in a series of important commentaries.
All forms of counterglobal Poverty: Xenopoulos, “Scenarios,” 1562. Cf. Gerlach, Extremely
Violent Societies, 263. Egypt and Libya: King, “Factoring Environmental Security,” 99, 100, 117,
359; Klare, “Climate Change Battlefields,” 358–59. Drought: Femia, “Climate Change,” 31. ISIS
and water: New York Times, 14 October 2014.
The ambivalence of interwar Polish Spector, Evangelicals and Israel, 187–88; Clark, Allies
for Armageddon, 5, 151, 170; Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 191. On attitudes towards
climate change: Smith and Leiserowitz, “American Evangelicals,” 4; and Anthony Leiserowitz,
personal communication, 26 August 2013.
As prime minister of Israel Weber, On the Road to Armageddon, 148; Clark, Allies for
Armageddon, 190, 229.
Americans, when they think For wartime antisemitism, see Abzug, America Views the
Holocaust, 87–92, 99–103, and passim. Mauthausen trial: Jardim, Mauthausen Trial, 123, 144,
189, 210. Bergen-Belsen: Damplo, “Prosecuting,” 24. For a balanced assessment of Roosevelt, see
Breitman and Lichtman, FDR, 315–30.
A misunderstanding about One can infer from Collier’s Bottom Billion, especially at 126, that
military intervention makes more sense after a state has failed than with the goal of making a state
fail.
Mass killings generally Regime changes and civil wars: Goldsmith and Semenovich, “Political
Instability,” 10.
The dominant stereotype Cf. Arendt, Origins, 310. In Bloodlands, I discuss all of these
policies.
On the Left, the dominant Horkheimer and Adorno, Dialektik der Aufklärung, especially 212,
217; quotations at 1, 15. See also Horkheimer, Eclipse of Reason, 176–77. The same mistake in a
less radical formulation can be found in Neumann’s reports to the OSS: Secret Reports, 28, 30.
See Habermas, Der philosophische Diskurs der Moderne, 135, 138; Kołakowski, Main Currents,
347; Zehnpfennig, Hitlers Mein Kampf, 129.
On the Right, the dominant See the longer discussion in Judt and Snyder, Thinking.
The ideal capitalism Rand: Burns, Goddess, 175.
As all economists know See generally Powell, Inquisition, 63, 98, and passim; Oreskes and
Conway, Merchants of Doubt, 169–215; Economist, 15 February 2012; Tollefson, “Sceptic,” 441. In
2011, the fossil fuel industry spent about $300 million to muddy the waters: Silver, Signal, 380.
See Farley, “Petroleum and Propaganda,” 40–49. See also Union of Concerned Scientists, “Got
Science?,” 18 October 2012; and Weart, “Denial,” 46, 48. Capitalism certainly registers the data of
climate change. Insurance companies keep precise records of storms as they restrict the
availability of flood insurance. Parker, Global Crisis, 691–92. The error of the libertarian Right is
echoed, in a certain way, by some members of the Christian Right. Creationists oppose the
theories of Darwin, as amplified by generations of scientists, with respect to nonhuman animals,
instead applying the term “science” to their static portrait of a natural order created by God. This
is one more conflation of science and politics. Meanwhile, in their support of unrestricted
capitalism, many creationists apply Social Darwinian concepts to their fellow human beings.
Humans have the right to dominate nature, and more competitive humans have the right to
dominate less competitive ones. This is yet another merger of science and politics.
Though no American would deny Hitler denial: Hitler and His Generals, 62. See Thomä,
“Sein und Zeit im Rückblick,” 285; Genette, Figures I, 101; Robbe-Grillet, Pour un nouveau
roman, 133. The denial of climate science poses serious problems for the U.S. Navy, which faces
the likelihood of flooding bases and the reality of competition for the waters of the melting Arctic.

Christian Science Monitor, 2 March 2010.
The popular notion The market is not nature: Bloom, Closing, 84; Bauman, Modernity, 235.
Cf. Moses, “Gespräch.” At this point in the argument I am demonstrating the relationships
between the concepts rather than educing the historical relationship. Cf. Moyn, Last Utopia, 82–
83.
When states are absent Nazi Germany murdered chiefly the citizens of other countries. What
about the states that carried our mass murder of their own citizens? The three most horrifying
twentieth-century cases—the People’s Republic of China, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
and Cambodia under Pol Pot—were all party-states, where both ideology and practice demanded
that the state institutions be secondary to party institutions, and where the legitimacy of the state
was completely undercut by the ideological appeal made by party leaders to the future of the
collectivity. These histories follow a different trajectory than that of Nazi Germany and its
neighbors but in one respect teach the same lesson: the significance of the state in the banal
conservative sense of a monopolist of violence and an object of reciprocal duties and rights. The
subject is vast and requires separate treatment; some of the relevant issues are raised in the Soviet
chapters of my Bloodlands.
Gustaw Herling-Grudziński Herling, World Apart, 132.
In the case of climate Only the state can create the structures within which scientists and
engineers can develop fruitful technologies. Individuals might follow market incentives in
developing fusion and other technologies, but only insofar as the state molds those incentives. The
simple decision by a state or states to invest in science would change the mood and deepen
confidence in the future.
Understanding the Holocaust For case studies of the practical dilemmas of rescue, see Power,
Problem from Hell.

A Note on Usages

By “Final Solution” I mean the German intention to eliminate the Jews by
some means from the territory under their control. By “Holocaust” I
mean the version of the Final Solution that was implemented, the mass
murder of Jews in Europe.
This book covers a broad linguistic territory. The Jews killed in the
Holocaust generally spoke different languages than the people who write
about the Holocaust today. My own coverage tilts towards the territories
where most European Jews lived and died, and towards their languages
at the time, including Yiddish, Polish, and Russian. These languages are
written in three different alphabets, the Hebrew, Latin, and Cyrillic. The
people who used them were usually multilingual and often known by
different names at different stages of life. I transliterate according to
simplified versions of the Library of Congress guidelines. Sometimes I
spell names as the people in question preferred. I have done my best to
keep the complexities arising from transliteration and translation from
interfering with voices and arguments. Localities were also known by
different names to their different inhabitants at the same time and by
different official names as regimes changed over time. I have opted for
known English toponyms where such exist and otherwise have used the
official name according to the political entity that governed when a
locality is first mentioned. Naturally, this does not imply any revanchism
on my part. I use “Lwów,” for example, because there is no good English
equivalent (no one says “Leopolis”), and this was the official name of the
city in Poland at the time when it enters the chronicle. Today the city is in
Ukraine and is known as Lviv. I use “Stalino” to describe the major city of
the Donbas because this is how it was known in Soviet Ukraine after
1924. Today it is called “Donetsk.” Translations, unless otherwise noted,
are my own.
Biblical citations follow the King James Bible. In the bibliography I

have indicated a date of first publication of a book when this might be of
interest. In the endnotes I use brackets to indicate that encrypted archival
material has been decrypted. The notes are coded to the first words of a
paragraph rather than to a superscript number. They use a short citation
formula of author and brief title; the full citations can be easily located in
the bibliography.

Archives and Abbreviations

AAN
AW

Archiwum Akt Nowych (Archive of New Files), Warsaw
Archiwum Wschodnie, Karta (Eastern Archive, Karta
Institute), Warsaw
BUW
Biblioteka Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego, Gabiner Rękopisów
(Warsaw University Library Manuscript Department),
Warsaw
CAW
Centralne Archiwum Wojskowe (Central Military Archive),
Rembertów
DAVO
Derzhavnyi Arkhiv Volyns’koï Oblasti (State Archive of the
Volyn Region), Lutsk
FVA
Fortunoff Video Archive for Holocaust Testimonies, Yale
University
GARF
Gosudarstvennyi Arkhiv Rossiiskoi Federatsii (State Archive
of the Russian Federation)
HI
Hoover Institution, Stanford University
IfZ
Institut für Zeitgeschichte (Institute for Contemporary
History), Munich
JPI
Józef Piłsudski Institute, New York
MJH
Museum of Jewish Heritage, New York
MWP
Muzeum Wojska Polskiego (Museum of the Polish Army),
Warsaw
NA
National Archives, Kew, United Kingdom
SPP
Studium Polski Podziemnej (Polish Underground Study
Trust), London
SUSC
Shoah Collection, University of Southern California
TsDAVO Tsentral’nyi Derzhavnyi Arkhiv Vyshchykh Orhaniv Vlady ta
Upravlinnia (Central State Archive of Higher Organs of
Government and Administration), Kyiv
USHMM United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, DC

YIVO
YMA
YV
ŻIH

Yivo Institute for Jewish Research, New York
Manuscripts and Archives, Sterling Memorial Library, Yale
University
Yad Vashem, Jerusalem
Żydowski Instytut Historyczny (Jewish Historical Institute),
Warsaw

Published Sources

Published Hitler Primary Sources
Hitler and His Generals: Military Conferences 1942–1945. Edited by
Gerhard L. Weinberg. New York: Enigma Books, 2003.
Hitler’s Second Book. Edited by Gerhard L. Weinberg. Translated by
Krista Smith. New York: Enigma Books, 2010. German edition 1961,
dictated 1928.
Hitler’s Table Talk 1941–1944. Translated by Norman Cameron and R. H.
Stevens. New York: Enigma Books, 2000.
Mein Kampf. Munich: Zentralverlag der NSDAP, 1939. Originally
published in 1925 and 1926 in two volumes.
Sämtliche Aufzeichnungen, 1905–1924. Edited by Eberhard Jäckel and
Axel Kuhn. Stuttgart, Ger.: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 1980.
Staatsmänner und Diplomaten bei Hitler: Vertrauliche Vertretern des
Auslandes 1942–1944. Edited by Andreas Hillgruber. Frankfurt:
Bernard and Graefe, 1970.

Published Nazi Primary Sources
Frank, Hans. “Ansprache.” In Das Judentum in der Rechtswissenschaft.
1. Die deutsche Rechtswissenschaft im Kampf gegen den jüdischen
Geist, 7–13. Berlin: Deutscher Rechtsverlag, 1936.
———. “Einleitung zum ‘Nationalsozialistischen Handbuch für Recht und
Gesetzgebung.’ ” In Rechtfertigungen des Unrechts: Das
Rechtsdenken im Nationalsozialismus in Originaltexten, edited by
Herlinde Pauer-Studer and Julian Fink, 141–79. Berlin: Suhrkamp,
2014.
Kühnl, Reinhard, ed. Der deutsche Faschismus in Quellen und
Dokumenten. Cologne: Papy-Rossa, 2000.
Schmitt, Carl. “The Grossraum Order of International Law with a Ban on
Intervention for Spatially Foreign Powers: A Contribution to the
Concept of Reich in International Law (1939–1941). In Writings on
War, edited and translated by Timothy Nunan, 75–134. Cambridge:
Polity Press, 2011.
———. “Eröffnung.” In Das Judentum in der Rechtswissenschaft: 1. Die
deutsche Rechtswissenschaft im Kampf gegen den jüdischen Geist,
14–18. Berlin: Deutscher Rechtsverlag, 1936.
———. “Neue Leitsätze für die Rechtspraxis.” In Rechtfertigungen des
Unrechts. Das Rechtsdenken im Nationalsozialismus in
Originaltexten, edited by Herlinde Pauer-Studer and Julian Find,
513–16. Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2014.
Witte, Peter, Michael Wildt, Martina Voigt, Dieter Pohl, Peter Klein,
Christian Gerlach, Christoph Dieckmann, and Andrej Angrick, eds.
Der Dienstkalender Heinrich Himmlers 1941/42. Hamburg: Hans
Christians Verlag, 1999.

Other Published Documents
Abzug, Robert H., ed. America Views the Holocaust, 1933–1945: A Brief
Documentary History. Boston: St. Martin’s, 1999.
Cienciala, Anna M., Natalia S. Lebedeva, and Wojciech Materski, eds.
Katyn: A Crime Without Punishment. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2007.
Danylenko, Vasyl’, and Serhiy Kokin, eds. Radians’kyi orhany
derzhavnoï bezpeky u 1939–chervni 1941 r. Vol. 1. Kyiv: KyivMohyla Akademiia, 2013.
Deportacje obywateli polskich z Zachodniej Ukrainy i Zachodniej
Białorusi w 1940/Deportatsii pol’skikh grazhdan iz Zapadnoi
Ukrainy i Zapadnoi Belorussii v 1940 godu. Warsaw: IPN, 2003.
Documents on British Foreign Policy 1919–1939. Third Series, vol. 3.
London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1950.
Documents on British Foreign Policy 1919–1939, Third Series, vol. 4.
London: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1951.
Documents on German Foreign Policy 1918–1945, Series D (1937–1945),
vol. 5. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1953.
Dubicki, Tadeusz, Daria Nałęcz, and Tessa Stirling, eds. Polsko-brytyjska
współpraca wywiadowcza podczas II wojny światowej. Warsaw:
Naczelna Dyrekcja Archiwów Państwowych, 2004.
Justiz und NS-Verbrechen: Sammlung deutscher Strafurteile wegen
nationalsozialistischer Tötungsverbrechen. Vol. 37, 2007. Lfd. Nr.
777, 398–441.
Justiz und NS-Verbrechen: Sammlung deutscher Strafurteile wegen
nationalsozialistischer Tötungsverbrechen. Vol. 43, 2010. Lfd. Nr.
856, 173–237.
Libera, Paweł, ed. II Rzeczpospolita wobec ruchu prometejskiego. Vol. 4.
Warsaw: Centralne Archiwum Wojskowe, 2013.
Lipski, Józef. Diplomat in Berlin 1933–1939. Edited by Wacław
Jędrzejewicz. New York: Columbia University Press, 1968.
Neumann, Franz, Herbert Marcuse, and Otto Kirchheimer. Secret

Reports on Nazi Germany: The Frankfurt School Contribution to
the War Effort. Edited by Raffaele Laudani. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 2013.
OUN v svitli postanov Velykykh Zboriv. N.p., 1955.
Skibińska, Alina, and Robert Szuchta, eds. Wybór źródełdo nauczania o
zagładzie Żydów na okupowanych ziemiach polskich. Warsaw:
Centrum Badań nad Żagłada Żydów, 2010.
United States Department of Defense. “Quadrennial Defense Review
Report.” February 2010.
United States Department of the Navy. Vice Chief of Naval Operations.
“Navy Climate Change Roadmap,” 21 May 2010.
Vladimirtsev, N. I., and A. I. Kokurin, eds. NKVD-MVD SSSR v bor’be s
banditizmom i vooruzhennym natsionalisticheskim podpol’em na
Zapadnoi Ukraine, v Zapadnoi Belorussii i Pribaltike 1939–1956.
Moscow: MVD Rossii, 2008.
Zarański, Józef, ed. Diariusz i teki Jana Szembeka. Vol. 4. London:
Orbis, 1972.
Zelenin, I., et al., eds. Tragediia sovetskoi derevni: Kollektivizatsiia i
raskulachivanie. Vol. 3. Moscow: Rosspen, 2000.

Diaries, Memoirs, and Correspondence
Adini, Ya’acov. ed. Dubno: sefer zikaron. Tel Aviv: Irgun yots’e Dubno
be-Yisra’el, 1966.
Bartoszewski, Władysław. The Warsaw Ghetto: A Christian’s Testimony.
Translated by Stephen G. Cappellari. Boston: Beacon Press, 1987.
Bartoszewski, Władysław, and Zofia Lewinówna, eds. Ten jest z ojczyzny
mojej. Warsaw: Świat Książki, 2007.
Begin, Menachem. The Revolt. 1948. Reprint, Los Angeles: Nash
Publishing, 1972.
Bryns’kyi, Anton. Po toï bik frontu. Kyiv: Politvydav Ukraïny, 1976–78.
Buber-Neumann, Margarete. Under Two Dictators: Prisoner of Hitler
and Stalin. 1949. Reprint, London: Pimlico, 2008.
Drymmer, Wiktor Tomir. W służbie Polsce. Warsaw: Gryf, 1998.
Giedroyc, Jerzy. Autobiografia na cztery ręce. Edited by Krzysztof
Pomian. Warsaw: Czytelnik, 1996.
Głowiński, Michał. The Black Seasons. Translated by Marci Shore.
Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 2005.
Good, William Z. “From ‘Jerushalayim d’Lita’ and Back.” Unpublished
memoir, 1988.
Herling, Gustaw. A World Apart. Translated by Andrzej Ciolkosz. 1951.
Reprint, New York: Penguin, 1996.
Józewski, Henryk. “Zamiast pamiętnika.” Zeszyty Historyczne, no. 59
(1982): 3–163.
Kahane, David. Lvov Ghetto Diary. Translated by Jerzy Michałowicz.
Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1990.
Karski, Jan. “Dziecko sanacji.” Interview by Maciej Wierzyński. Tygodnik
Powszechny, 24 April 2012.
———. Story of a Secret State: My Report to the World. London:
Penguin, 2011.
Klukowski, Zygmunt. Zamojszczyzna 1918–1943. Vol. 2. Warsaw: Karta,
2007.

Kulka, Otto Dov. Landscapes of the Metropolis of Death. Translated by
Ralph Mandel. London: Allen Lane, 2013.
Lankin, Eliahu. To Win the Promised Land: The Story of a Freedom
Fighter. Translated by Artziah Hershberg. Walnut Creek, Calif.:
Benmir Books, 1992.
Lemkin, Raphael. Totally Unofficial. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 2013.
Lewin, Kurt I. Przeżyłem: Saga Świętego Jura spisana w roku 1946.
Warsaw: Zeszyty Literackie, 2006.
Margolin, Julius. Reise in das Land der Lager. Berlin: Suhrkamp, 2013.
Michel’son, Frida. Ia perezhila Rumbulu. Israel, 1973.
Moczarski, Kazimierz. Rozmowy z katem. Cracow: Znak, 2009.
Peleg-Mariańska, Miriam, and Mordecai Peleg. Witnesses: Life in
Occupied Kraków. London: Routledge, 1991.
Pilecki, Witold. The Auschwitz Volunteer: Beyond Bravery. Translated
by Jarek Garliński. Los Angeles: Aquila Polonica, 2012.
Rabin, Haim. ed. Vishnivits: sefer zikaron le-kedoshe Vishnivits shenispu be-shi’ath ha-natzim. Tel Aviv: Irgun ‘ole Vishnivits, 1979.
Rubenstein, Joshua, and Ilya Altman, eds. The Unknown Black Book:
The Holocaust in the German-Occupied Soviet Territories.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008.
Sefer Lutsk. Tel Aviv: Irgun Yots’e Lutsk be-Yisrael, 1961.
Shamir, Yitzhak, Summing Up: An Autobiography. Boston: Little,
Brown, and Company, 1994.
Shtokfish, David, ed. Pinkes Kuzmir. Tel Aviv: Irgunei yots’ei Kuzmir bimedinat Yisra’el uva-tefutsot, 1970.
Shumuk, Danylo. Perezhyte i peredumane. Kyiv: Vydavnyts’tvo imeni
Oleny Telihy, 1998.
Silberman, David. “Jan Lipke, An Unusual Man.” In Muted Voices:
Jewish Survivors of Latvia Remember, edited by Gertrude
Schneider, 87–111. New York: Philosophical Library, 1987.
Spanily, Andrzej. ed. Pisane miłością: Losy wdów katyńskich. Vol. 3.
Gdynia, Poland: Rymsza, 2003.
Sobański, Antoni. Cywil w Berlinie. Warsaw: Sic!, 2006.

Stein, Edith. Self-Portrait in Letters. Translated by Josephine Koeppel.
Washington, D.C.: Institute of Carmelite Studies, 1993.
Weissberg-Cybulski, Aleksander. Wielka czystka. Translated by Adam
Ciołkosz. Paris: Institut Littéraire, 1967.
Yasni, A. Volf. ed. Sefer Klobutsk: Mazkeret kavod le-kehilah hakedoshah she-hushmedah / Yizkor-bukh fun der farpeynikter
Klobutsker kehile. Tel Aviv: Irgun yots’e Klubotsk be-yisra’el and
Klobutsker landsmanshaftn fun Frankraykh un fun Oystralye, 1960.

Newspaper and Press Articles (chronological order)
“Die Weltgefahr des Bolschewismus: Rede des Reichskanzlers Adolf
Hitler im Berliner Sportpalast.” Deutschösterreichische
Tageszeitung, 3 March 1933.
“Beck Says Poland Is Not Anti-Jewish.” New York Times, 30 January
1937.
“Poles Renew Call for Exile of Jews.” New York Times, 14 June 1937.
“Poland Seen Opposed to Palestine Plan.” New York Times, 9 July 1937.
“Beck Says Poland Is Loyal to Allies.” New York Times, 25 January 1939.
“Stern Gang Leader Hailed as Patriot.” Times (London), 16 February
1967.
Perlez, Jane. “Kigeme Journal: Why Worry About Crops When Fishing’s
Better!” New York Times, 14 December 1989.
Motyka, Grzegorz. “Lachów usunąc.” Gazeta Wyborcza, 15 April 2002.
Ridgeway, Eliza. “A Survivor’s Story: Resident Reflects on Family’s
Escape from the Nazis.” Los Altos Town Crier, 15 April 2009.
“Buying Farmland Abroad: Outsourcing’s Third Wave.” Economist, 21
May 2009.
Broder, John M. “Climate Change Seen as Threat to U.S. Security.” New
York Times, 9 August 2009.
Rogers, Walter. “War Over the Arctic? Climate Change Skeptics Distract
Us from Security Risks.” Christian Science Monitor, 2 March 2010.
Pięciach, Wojciech. “Szpieg ze Sztokholmu.” Tygodnik Powszechny, 19
April 2011.
Goldenberg, Suzanne. “Wall Street Journal Rapped Over Climate Change
Stance.” Guardian (Manchester), 1 February 2012.
“Trouble in the Heartland: Climate-Change Skepticism.” Economist, 15
February 2012.
Winston, Andrew. “Politicians Who Deny Climate Change Cannot Be ProBusiness.” Bloomberg: Harvard Business Review, 7 September
2012.

“Now You Don’t: Arctic Ice.” Economist, 22 September 2012, 89–90.
Union of Concerned Scientists, “Got Science? Not at News Corporation.”
18 October 2012.
“Heartland Institute.” Sourcewatch.org, 26 November 2012.
Goldenberg, Suzanne. “US Coastal Cities in Danger as Sea Levels Rise
Faster Than Expected, Study Warns.” Guardian (Manchester), 27
November 2012.
Pollack, Martin. “Des is a Hetz und kost net viel.” Der Standard, 2 March
2013.
“Cold Comfort Farms.” Economist, 4 September 2013.
Novorossiia. 1 August 2014, map.
Davenport, Coral. “Pentagon Signals Security Risks of Climate Change.”
New York Times, 13 October 2014.
Landler, Mark, “U.S. and China Reach Climate Accord After Months of
Talks.” New York Times, 11 November 2014.

Secondary Sources
Abrams, Bradley. “The Second World War and the East European
Revolution.” East European Politics and Societies 16, no. 3 (2003):
623–64.
Abramson, Henry. A Prayer for the Government: Ukrainians and Jews
in Revolutionary Times, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1999.
Adam, Uwe Dietrich. “How Spontaneous Was the Pogrom?” In November
1938: From ‘Kristallnacht’ to Genocide, edited by Walter H. Pehle,
73–94. Oxford: Berg, 1990.
Alexander, L.V., et al., “Global Observed Changes in Daily Climate
Extremes of Temperature and Precipitation.” Journal of Geophysical
Research 111 (2006): 1–65.
Aliyu, Rafeeat. “Agricultural Development and ‘Land Grabs’: The Chinese
Presence in the African Agricultural Sector.” Consultancy African
Intelligence, 16 January 2012.
Aly, Götz. Hitler’s Beneficiaries: Plunder, Racial War, and the Nazi
Welfare State. Translated by Jefferson Chase. New York:
Metropolitan Books, 2007.
Aly, Götz, and Susanne Heim. Vordenker der Vernichtung: Auschwitz
und die deutschen Pläne für eine neue europäische Ordnung.
Hamburg: Hoffmann und Campe, 1991.
Ancel, Jean. The History of the Holocaust in Romania. Translated by
Yaffah Murciano. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2011.
Angrick, Andrej. Besatzungspolitik und Massenmord: Die Einsatzgruppe
D in der südlichen Sowjetunion 1941–1943. Hamburg: Hamburger
Edition, 2003.
Angrick, Andrej, and Peter Klein. The “Final Solution” in Riga:
Exploitation and Annihilation, 1941–1944. Translated by Ray
Brandon. New York: Berghahn Books, 2012.
Applebaum, Anne. Iron Curtain: The Crushing of Eastern Europe 1944–
1956. New York: Doubleday, 2012.

Arad, Yitzhak. Belzec, Sobibor, Treblinka: The Operation Reinhard
Death Camps. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1987.
———. The Holocaust in the Soviet Union, Lincoln: University of
Nebraska Press, 2009.
———. “Jewish Family Camps in the Forests: An Original Means of
Rescue.” In Jewish Resistance to the Holocaust, edited by Michael R.
Marrus, 234–45. Westport, Conn.: Meckler, 1989.
Arad, Yitzhak, Shmuel Krakowski, and Shmuel Spector, eds. The
Einsatzgruppen Reports. New York: Holocaust Library, 1989.
Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of
Evil. London: Faber and Faber, 1963.
———. Essays in Understanding, 1930–1954. New York: Schocken
Books, 2005.
———. In der Gegenwart. Munich: Piper, 2000.
———. The Jewish Writings. New York: Schocken Books, 2007.
———. The Origins of Totalitarianism. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1951.
Armstrong, John. Soviet Partisans in World War II. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press, 1964.
Arnold, Klaus Jochen. “Die Eroberung und Behandlung der Stadt Kiew
durch die Wehrmacht im September 1941: Zur Radikalisierung der
Besatzungspolitik.” Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 58, no. 1
(1999): 23–64.
Baberowski, Jörg. Der rote Terror: Die Geschichte des Stalinismus.
Munich: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 2003.
Baberowski, Jörg, and Anselm Doering-Manteuffel. “The Quest for Order
and the Pursuit of Terror.” In Beyond Totalitarianism: Stalinism
and Nazism Compared, edited by Michael Geyer and Sheila
Fitzpatrick, 180–227. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2009.
Bacon, Gershon C. The Politics of Tradition: Agudat Yisrael in Poland,
1916–1939. Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 1996.
Bajohr, Frank, and Dieter Pohl. Der Holocaust als offenes Geheimnis:
Die Deutschen, die NS-Führung und die Alliierten. Munich: Beck,
2006.
Baker, Michael L. “The Coming Conflicts of Climate Change.” Council on

Foreign Relations, 7 September 2010.
Bärsch, Claus Ekkehard. Die politische Religion des
Nationalsozialismus: Die religiöse Dimension der NS-Ideologie in
den Schriften von Dietrich Eckart, Joseph Goebbels, Alfred
Rosenberg und Adolf Hitler. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1998.
Bartniczak, Mieczysław. From Andrzejewo to Pecynka, 1939–1944.
Warsaw: Książka i Wiedza, 1984.
Bartoszewski, Władysław. “Rozmowa.” In “Żegota”: Rada Pomocy
Żydom 1942–1945, edited by Andrzej Krzysztof Kunert, 7–36.
Warsaw: Rada Ochrony Pamięci Walk i Męczeństwa, 2002.
———. Warszawski pierścień śmierci. Warsaw: Świat Ksiażki, 2008.
Bartov, Omer. “Eastern Europe as the Site of Genocide.” Journal of
Modern History, no. 80 (2008): 557–93.
———. Mirrors of Destruction: War, Genocide, and Modern Identity.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Bauer, Yehuda. The Death of the Shtetl. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2010.
Bauman, Zygmunt. Modernity and the Holocaust. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 1989.
Bell, J. Bowyer. Terror Out of Zion: The Israeli Fight for Independence.
New Brunswick, N.J.: Transaction Publishers, 1996.
Bemporad, Elissa. Becoming Soviet Jews: The Bolshevik Experiment in
Minsk. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013.
———. “The Politics of Blood: Jews and Ritual Murder in the Land of the
Soviets.” Paper presented at Yale University, 2014.
Bender, Sara. The Jews of Białystok During World War II and the
Holocaust. Translated by Yaffa Murciano. Waltham, Mass.: Brandeis
University Press, 2008.
Benecke, Werner. Die Ostgebiete der Zweiten Polnischen Republik.
Cologne: Böhlau Verlag, 1999.
Benz, Wolfgang. “Pogrom und Volksgemeinschaft. Zwischen Abscheu
und Beteiligung: Die Öffentlichkeit des 9. November 1938.” In Die
Novemberpogrome 1938: Versuch einer Bilanz, edited by Andreas
Nachama and Claudia Steuer, 8–19. Berlin: Stiftung Topographie des
Terrors, 2009.

Benz, Wolfgang, Konrad Kwiet, and Jürgen Matthäus. Einsatz im
“Reichskommissariat Ostland”: Dokumente zum Völkermord im
Baltikum und in Weissrussland 1941–1944. Berlin: Metropol Verlag,
1998.
Beorn, Waitman Wade. Marching into Darkness: The Wehrmacht and
the Holocaust in Belarus. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 2014.
Berger, James. After the End: Representations of Post-Apocalypse.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999.
Berger, Sara. Experten der Vernichtung: Das T4-Reinhardt Netzwerk in
den Lagern Belzec, Sobibor und Treblinka. Hamburg: Hamburger
Edition, 2013.
Berkhoff, Karel C. “Dina Pronicheva’s Story of Surviving the Babi Yar
Massacre: German, Jewish, Soviet, Russian, and Ukrainian
Records.” In The Shoah in Ukraine: History, Testimony,
Memorialization, edited by Ray Brandon and Wendy Lower, 291–
317. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008.
———. Harvest of Despair: Life and Death in Ukraine Under Nazi Rule.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Beyrau, Dietrich. “Der Erste Weltkrieg als Bewährungsprobe:
Bolschewistische Lernprozesse aus dem ‘imperialistischen Krieg.’ ”
Journal of Modern European History 1, no. 1 (2003): 96–123.
Bikont, Anna. My z Jedwabnego. Warsaw: Proszyński i S-ka, 2004.
Birnbaum, Pierre. Prier pour l’état: les Juifs, l’alliance royale et la
démocratie. Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 2003.
———. Sur la corde raide: Parcours juifs entre exil et citoyenneté. Paris:
Flammarion, 2002.
Biskupska, Jadwiga M. “Extermination and the Elite: Warsaw under Nazi
Occupation, 1939–1944.” PhD diss., Yale University, 2013.
Black, Peter. “Askaris in the ‘Wild East’: The Deployment of Auxiliaries
and the Implementation of Nazi Racial Policy in Lublin District.” In
The Germans and the East, edited by Charles W. Ingrao and Franz
A. J. Szabo, 277–309. West Lafayette, Ind.: Purdue University Press,
2008.
———. “Handlanger der Endlösung: Die Trawniki-Männer und die Aktion

Reinhard 1941–1943.” In Aktion Reinhardt, Der Völkermord an den
Juden im Generalgouvernement 1941–1944, edited by Bogdan
Musial, 309–52. Osnabrück, Ger.: Fibre, 2004.
Blank, Stephen. “At a Dead End: Russian Policy in the Far East.”
Demokratizatsiya 17, (2009): 17, 122–44.
Blatman, Daniel. The Death Marches: The Final Phase of Nazi Genocide.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2011.
Bloom, Allan. The Closing of the American Mind. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1987.
Bloxham, Donald. The Final Solution: A Genocide. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2011.
Böhler, Jochen. Der Überfall: Deutschlands Krieg gegen Polen.
Frankfurt am Main: Eichborn, 2009.
———. “Grösste Härte”: Verbrechen der Wehrmacht in Polen
September/Oktober 1939. Osnabrück, Ger.: Deutsches Historisches
Institut, 2005.
Borzęcki, Jerzy. The Soviet-Polish Peace of 1921 and the Creation of
Interwar Europe. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2008.
Botz, Gerhard. “ ‘Judenhatz’ und ‘Reichskristallnacht’ im historischen
Kontext: Pogrome in Österreich 1938 und in Osteuropa um 1900.” In
Der Pogrom 1938: Judenverfolgung in Österreich und Deutschland,
edited by Kurt Schmid and Robert Streibel, 9–24. Vienna: Picus
Verlag, 1990.
———. Nationalsozialismus in Wien: Machtübernahme,
Herrschaftssicherung, Radikalisierung, 1938–1939. Vienna:
Mandelbaum, 2008.
Brakel, Alexander. “ ‘Das allergefährlichste ist die Wut der Bauern’: Die
Versorgung der Partisanen und ihr Verhältnis zur Zivilbevölkerung.
Eine Fallstudie zum Gebiet Baranowicze 1941–1944.”
Vierteljahreshefte für Zeitgeschichte, no. 3 (2007): 393–424.
———. Unter Rotem Stern und Hakenkreuz: Baranowicze 1939 bis 1944.
Paderborn, Ger.: Schöningh, 2009.
———. “Was There a ‘Jewish Collaboration’ under Soviet Occupation? A
Case Study from the Baranowicze Region.” In Shared History,
Divided Memory: Jews and Others in Soviet-Occupied Poland,

1939–1941, edited by Elazar Barkan, Elizabeth A. Cole, and Kai
Struve, 225–44. Leipzig, Ger.: Leipziguniversitätsverlag, 2007.
Brandenberger, David. “Stalin’s Last Crime? Recent Scholarship on
Postwar Soviet Antisemitism and the Doctor’s Plot.” Kritika, vol. 6,
No. 1, 2005, 187–204.
Brandon, Ray. “Deportation ins Reichsinnere.” In Naziverbrechen:
Täter, Taten, Bewältigungsversuche, edited by Martin Cüppers,
Jürgen Matthäus, and Andrej Angrick, 75–88. Darmstadt, Ger.:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2013.
———. “The First Wave.” Unpublished study, 2009.
Braun, Robert, and Peter Tammes. “Religious Deviance and Mobilization:
The Rescue of Jews in the Netherlands.” March 2013.
Brautigam, Deborah, and Tang Xiaoyang. “China’s Engagement in
African Agriculture: ‘Down to the Countryside.’ ” China Quarterly,
no. 199 (1999): 686–706.
Brechtken, Magnus. “Madagaskar für die Juden”: Antisemitische Idee
und politische Praxis 1885–1945. Munich: R. Oldenbourg Verlag,
1997.
Breitman, Richard. “Himmler and the ‘Terrible Secret’ Among the
Executioners.” Journal of Contemporary History 26, nos. 3–4
(1991): 431–51.
Breitman, Richard, and Allan J. Lichtman. FDR and the Jews.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2013.
Brown, Oli, and Alec Crawford. “Climate Change and Security in Africa: A
Study for the Nordic-African Foreign Ministers Meeting.”
International Institute for Sustainable Development, March 2009.
Browning, Christopher R. Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101
and the Final Solution in Poland. New York: HarperCollins, 1993.
Bruttmann, Tal. Au bureau des Affaires juives: L’administration
française et l’application de la législation antisémite (1940–1944).
Paris: La Découverte, 2006.
Buchheim, Hans. “Die Höheren SS- und Polizeiführer.” Vierteljahrshefte
für Zeitgeschichte 11, no. 4 (1963) : 362–91.
Budnitskii, Oleg. Russian Jews Between the Reds and the Whites, 1917–
1920. Translated by Timothy J. Portice. Philadelphia: University of

Pennsylvania Press, 2012.
Burds, Jeffrey. “Agentura: Soviet Informants’ Networks and the
Ukrainian Underground in Galicia.” East European Politics and
Societies 11, no. 1 (1997): 89–130.
———. Holocaust in Rovno: The Massacre at Sosenki Forest, November
1941. New York: Palgrave, 2013.
Burleigh, Michael. The Third Reich: A New History. New York: Hill and
Wang, 2000.
Burns, Jennifer. Goddess of the Market: Ayn Rand and the American
Right. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Burrin, Phillip. Hitler et les Juifs. Paris: Éditions de Seuil, 1989.
Cabanel, Patrick. “Protestantismes minoritaires, affinités judéoprotestantes et sauvetage des Juifs.” In La résistance aux génocides:
De la pluralité des actes de sauvetage, edited by Jacques Sémelin,
Claire Andrieu, and Sarah Gensburger, 445–56. Paris: Presses de la
Fondation Nationale des Sciences Politiques, 2008.
Cała, Alina. Żyd—wróg odwieczny? Antysemityzm w Polsce i jego
żródła. Warsaw: Nisza, 2012.
Campbell, David J., Jennifer M. Olson, and Len Berry. “Population
Pressure, Agricultural Productivity, and Land Degradation in
Rwanda: An Agenda for Collaborative Training, Research and
Analysis,” Rwanda Society-Environment Project, Michigan State
University, Working Paper 1, 1993.
Carynnyk, Marco. “The Palace on the Ikva: Dubne, September 18th, 1939,
and June 24th, 1941.” In Shared History, Divided Memory: Jews
and Others in Soviet-Occupied Poland, 1939–1941, edited by Elazar
Barkan, Elizabeth A. Cole, and Kai Struve, 263–301. Leipzig, Ger.:
Leipzig Universitätsverlag, 2007.
Case, Holly. Between States: The Transylvanian Question and the
European Idea During World War II. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
University Press, 2009.
Cayan, Daniel R. et al. “Climate Change Projections of Sea Level Extremes
Along the California Coast.” Climatic Change, no. 87 (2008): S57–
S73.
Cienciala, Anna M. “The Foreign Policy of Józef Piłsudski and Józef Beck,

1926–1939: Misconceptions and Interpretations.” Polish Review 65,
nos. 1–2 (2011): 111–52.
Chalecki, Elizabeth L. “He Who Would Rule: Climate Change in the Arctic
and Its Implications for U.S. National Security.” Paper presented at
the International Studies Association, 2007.
Chan, Michelle Mengsu. “Ho Feng-Shan and the Jews He Saved.”
Seminar paper, Yale University, December 2012.
Chapoutot, Johann. “L’historicité nazie: Temps de la nature et abolition
de l’histoire.” Vingtième Siècle, no. 117 (2013): 43–55.
———. “Les juristes nazis face au traité de Versailles (1919–1945).”
Relations internationales, no. 149 (2012): 73–88.
———. La loi du sang. Paris: Gallimard, 2014. Pagination cited according
to manuscript kindly provided by the author.
———. Le nazisme et l’Antiquité. Paris: Quadrige, 2012.
———. “Les Nazis et la ‘Nature.’ ” Vingtième Siècle, no. 113 (2012) : 29–
39.
Chirot, Daniel, and Clark McCauley. Why Not Kill Them All? The Logic
and Prevention of Mass Political Murder. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2006.
Chojnowski, Andrzej. Piłsudczycy u władzy: Dzieje Bezpartyjnego Bloku
Współpracy z Rządem. Wrocław, Poland: Ossolineum, 1986.
Clark, Victoria. Allies for Armageddon: The Rise of Christian Zionism.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2007.
Clarke, Andrew. et al. “Antarctic Ecology: From Genes to Ecosystems
(Introduction).” Philosophical Transactions: Biological Sciences
362, no. 1477, 5–9.
Cobel-Tokarska, Marta. Bezludna wyspa, nora, grób: wojenne kryjówki
Żydów w okupowanej Polsce. Warsaw: IPN, 2012.
Cohen, Laurie. Smolensk Under the Nazis: Everyday Life in Occupied
Russia. Rochester, N.Y.: University of Rochester Press, 2013.
Collier, Paul. The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest Countries Are Failing
and What Can Be Done About It. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2007.
Collingham, Lizzie. The Taste of War: World War II and the Battle for
Food. New York: Penguin, 2012.

Confino, Alon. A World Without Jews: The Nazi Imagination from
Persecution to Genocide. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
2014.
Connelly, John. From Enemy to Brother: The Revolution in Catholic
Teaching on the Jews. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2012.
Conrad, Sebastian. Globalisation and the Nation in Imperial Germany.
Translated by Sorcha O’Hagan. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2010.
Conway, Martin. Collaboration in Belgium: Léon Degrelle and the Rexist
Movement. London: Yale University Press, 1993.
Copeaux, Étienne. “Le mouvement ‘Prométhéen.’ ” Cahiers d’études sur
la Méditerranée orientale et le monde turco-iranien, no. 16 (1993):
9–45.
Croes, Marnix. “The Holocaust in the Netherlands and the Rate of Jewish
Survival.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 20, no. 3 (2006) : 474–
90.
———. “Pour une approche quantitative de la survie et du sauvetage des
Juifs.” In La résistance aux génocides: De la pluralité des actes de
sauvetage, edited by Jacques Sémelin, Claire Andrieu, and Sarah
Gensburger, 83–98. Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale des
Sciences Politiques, 2008.
Curilla, Wolfgang. Der Judenmord in Polen und die deutsche
Ordnungspolizei. Paderborn, Ger.: Ferdinand Schöningh, 2011.
Dallin, Alexander. German Rule in Russia, 1941–1945: A Study of
Occupation Policies. London: St. Martin’s Press, 1957.
Damplo, Danica. “Prosecuting the Beasts of Belsen.” Research paper,
London School of Economics, 2014.
Darwin, Charles. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex. 2
vols. London: John Murray, 1871.
Davies, Norman. “The Misunderstood Victory in Europe.” New York
Review of Books, 25 May 1995.
———. Rising ’44: “The Battle for Warsaw.” London: Macmillan, 2003.
———. White Eagle, Red Star: The Polish-Soviet War, 1919–1920. New
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1972.

Dean, Martin. Robbing the Jews: The Confiscation of Jewish Property in
the Holocaust, 1933–1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2008.
———. “The Service of Poles in the German Local Police
(Schutzmannschaft Einzeldienst) in the Eastern Districts of Poland
and Their Role in the Holocaust.” 2002.
Debicki, Roman. The Foreign Policy of Poland 1919–1939. London: Pall
Mall Press, 1963.
de Jong, Louis. The Netherlands and Nazi Germany. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1990.
Denison, R. Ford. Darwinian Agriculture: How Understanding
Evolution Can Improve Agriculture. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2012.
Diamond, Jared. Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed. New
York: Penguin, 2005.
Dieckmann, Christoph. Deutsche Besatzungspolitik in Litauen 1941–
1944. 2 vols., Göttingen, Ger.: Wallstein Verlag, 2011.
———. “ ‘Jüdischer Bolschewismus’ 1917 bis 1921.” In Holocaust und
Völkermorde. Die Reichweite des Vergleichs, edited by Sybille
Steinbacher, 55–81. Frankfurt: Campus Verlag, 2014.
Dikötter, Frank. Mao’s Great Famine: The History of China’s Most
Devastating Catastrophe, 1958–62. London: Bloomsbury, 2010.
Dmitrów, Edmund. “Die Einsatzgruppen der deutschen Sicherheitspolizei
und des Sicherheitsdienstes zu Beginn der Judenvernichtung im
Gebiet von Łomża und Białystok im Sommer 1941.” In Der Beginn
der Vernichtung. Zum Mord an den Juden in Jedwabne und
Umgebung im Sommer 1941, edited by Edmund Dmitrów, Paweł
Machcewicz, and Tomasz Szarota, and translated by Beate Kosmala,
95–208. Osnabrück, Ger.: Fibre, 2004.
Drymmer, Wiktor Tomir. “Zagadnienie żydowskie w Polsce 1935–1939.”
Zeszyty Historyczne 13 (1968): 55–77.
Dulić, Tomislav. “Mass Killing in the Independent State of Croatia, 1941–
1945: A Case for Comparative Research.” Journal of Genocide
Research 8, no. 3 (2006): 225–81.
Dumitru, Diana. “Through the Eyes of the Survivors: Jewish-Gentile

Relations in Bessarabia and Transnistria During the Holocaust.” In
Eradicating Differences: The Treatment of Minorities in NaziDominated Europe, edited by Anton Weiss-Wendt, 203–27.
Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars, 2010.
Dwork, Debórah, and Robert Jan van Pelt. Auschwitz. New York: Norton,
1996.
———. Holocaust: A History. New York: Norton, 2002.
Edele, Mark, and Michael Geyer, “States of Exception.” In Beyond
Totalitarianism: Stalinism and Nazism Compared, edited by
Michael Geyer and Sheila Fitzpatrick, 345–395. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Eder, Thomas Stephan. China-Russia Relations in Central Asia.
Wiesbaden, Ger.: Springer, 2014.
Edmonds, James A., and Norman J. Rosenberg. “Climate Change
Impacts for the Conterminous USA: An Integrated Assessment
Summary.” Climate Change, no. 69 (2005): 151–62.
Eichholtz, Dietrich. Krieg um Öl: Ein Erdölimperium als deutsches
Kriegsziel (1938–1943). Leipzig, Ger.: Leipziger Universitätsverlag,
2006.
Eidintas, Alfonsas. Jews, Lithuanians, and the Holocaust. Vilnius,
Lithuania: Versus Aureus, 2003.
Engel, David. Facing a Holocaust: The Polish Government-in-Exile and
the Jews, 1943–1945. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1993.
———. Historians of the Jews and the Holocaust. Stanford, Calif.:
Stanford University Press, 2006.
———. The Holocaust: The Third Reich and the Jews. Harlow, UK:
Pearson, 2000.
———. In the Shadow of Auschwitz: The Polish Government-in-Exile and
the Jews, 1939–1942. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1987.
———. “Poles, Jews, and Historical Objectivity.” Slavic Review 46, nos.
3–4 (1987): 568–80.
Engelking, Barbara. Jest taki piękny, słoneczny dzień: Losy Żydów
szukających ratunku na wsi polskiej 1942–1945. Warsaw: Centrum

Badań nad Zagłada Żydów, 2011.
Engelking, Barbara, and Jan Grabowski. “Żydów łamiących prawo
należy karać śmiercieą!”: Przestępczość Żydów w Warszawie 1939–
1942. Warsaw: Centrum Badań nad Zagłada Żydów, 2010.
Engelking, Barbara, and Jacek Leociak. The Warsaw Ghetto: A Guide to
the Perished City. Translated by Emma Harris. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 2009.
Engelking, Barbara, and Dariusz Libionka. Żydzi w powstańczej
Warszawie. Warsaw: Centrum Badań nad Zagłada Żydów, 2009.
Epstein, Catherine. Model Nazi: Arthur Greiser and the Occupation of
Western Poland. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Ericksen, Robert P. Complicity in the Holocaust: Churches and
Universities in Nazi Germany. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2012.
Evans, Richard J. The Third Reich in Power. London: Penguin, 2005.
Evenson, R. E., and M. Rosegrant. “The Economic Consequences of Crop
Genetic Improvement Programmes.” In Crop Variety Improvement
and Its Effect on Productivity, edited by R. E. Evenson and D.
Gollin, 473–98. Wallingford, UK: CABI, 2003.
Ezergailis, Andrew. The Holocaust in Latvia: The Missing Center. Riga:
Historical Institute of Latvia, 1996.
Falk, Barbara. Sowjetische Städte in der Hungersnot 1932/33. Cologne:
Böhlau Verlag, 2005.
Farley, John W. “Petroleum and Propaganda: The Anatomy of the Global
Warming Denial Industry.” Monthly Review 64, no. 1 (2012): 40–53.
Faye, Jean-Pierre. “Carl Schmitt, Göring, et l’État total.” In Carl Schmitt
ou le mythe du politique, edited by Yves Charles Zarka, 161–82.
Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2009.
Federico, Giovanni. “Natura Non Fecit Saltus: The 1930s as the
Discontinuity in the History of European Agriculture.” In War,
Agriculture, and Food: Rural Europe from the 1930s to the 1950s,
edited by Leen van Molle, Yves Segers, and Paul Brassley, 15–32.
New York: Routledge, 2012.
Fein, Helen. Accounting for Genocide: National Responses and Jewish
Victimization During the Holocaust. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1984.
Fermia, Franceso, and Caitlin Werrell, eds. “The Arab Spring and Climate
Change.” February 2013.
Ferrara, Antonio, and Niccolo Pianciola. L’età delle migrazioni forzate:
Esodi e deportazioni in Europa 1853–1953. Bologna: Il Mulino,
2012.
Fest, Joachim C. Das Gesicht des Dritten Reiches. Munich: Piper, 2006.
Finkel, Evgeny. “Victim’s Politics: Jewish Behavior During the
Holocaust.” PhD diss., University of Wisconsin–Madison, 2012.
Fischer, Fritz. Griff nach der Weltmacht. Düsseldorf, Ger.: Droste, 1961.
Fischer, Klaus P. Hitler and America. Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2011.
Fogelman, Ewa. Conscience and Courage: Rescuers of Jews During the
Holocaust. New York: Anchor Books, 1994.
Foucault, Michel. Naissance de la biopolitique: Cours au Collège de
France, 1978–1979. Paris: Gallimard, 2004.
Fralon, José-Alain. A Good Man in Evil Times: The Heroic Story of
Aristides de Sousa-Mendes. Translated by Peter Graham. New York:
Basic Books, 2000.
Friedlander, Henry. The Origins of Nazi Genocide: From Euthanasia to
the Final Solution. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1995.
Friedländer, Saul. “Some Reflections on the Historicization of National
Socialism.” In Reworking the Past: Hitler, the Holocaust, and the
Historians’ Debate, edited by Peter Baldwin, 88–101. Boston:
Beacon Press, 1990.
———. The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews, 1939–
1945. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.
Friedman, Philip. Roads to Extinction: Essays on the Holocaust. New
York: Jewish Publication Society of America, 1980.
Fritzsche, Peter. “The Holocaust and the Knowledge of Murder.” Journal
of Modern History 80, no. 3 (2008): 594–613.
Gawin, Magdalena. “Pensjonat Jadwigi Długoborskiej.” Teologia
Polityczna, no. 7 (2013): 142–59.

Gedye, G. E. R. Betrayal in Central Europe: Austria and Czechoslovakia:
The Fallen Bastions. New York: Harper and Brothers, 1939.
Gehl, Jürgen. Austria, Germany, and the Anschluss, 1931–1938. London:
Oxford University Press, 1963.
Geiss, Imanuel. Der polnische Grenzstreifen 1914–1918. Lübeck, Ger.:
Matthiesen, 1960.
Geissbühler, Simon. Blutiger Juli: Rumäniens Vernichtungskrieg und
der vergessene Massenmord an den Juden 1941. Paderborn, Ger.:
Schöningh, 2013.
———. “ ‘He Spoke Yiddish Like a Jew’: Neighbors’ Contribution to the
Mass Killing of Jews in Northern Bukovina and Bessarabia, July
1941.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 28, no. 3 (2014): 430–49.
Gellately, Robert. Lenin, Stalin, and Hitler: The Age of Social
Catastrophe. New York: Knopf, 2007.
———. Stalin’s Curse: Battling for Communism in War and Cold War.
New York: Knopf, 2013.
Genette, Gérard. Figures I. Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1966.
Gerlach, Christian. Extremely Violent Societies: Mass Violence in the
Twentieth-Century World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2010.
———. “Failure of Plans for an SS Extermination Camp in Mogilëv,
Belorussia,” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 11, no. 1 (1997): 60–78.
———. Kalkulierte Morde: Die deutsche Wirtschafts- und
Vernichtungspolitik in Weissrussland 1941 bis 1944. Hamburg:
Hamburger Edition, 1999.
———. Krieg, Ernährung, Völkermord: Forschungen zur deutschen
Vernichtungspolitik im Zweiten Weltkrieg. Hamburg: Hamburger
Edition, 1998.
———. “The Wannsee Conference, the Fate of the German Jews, and
Hitler’s Decision in Principle to Exterminate All European Jews.”
Journal of Modern History 70, no. 4 (1998): 759–812.
Gerlach, Christian, and Götz Aly. Das letzte Kapitel: Realpolitik,
Ideologie, und der Mord an den ungarischen Juden 1944–45.
Stuttgart, Ger.: Deutsche Verlags-Anstalt, 2002.
Gerwarth, Robert. Hitler’s Hangman: The Life of Heydrich. New Haven,

Conn. : Yale University Press, 2011.
Gerwarth, Robert, and Stephan Malinowski. “Hannah Arendt’s Ghosts:
Reflections on the Disputable Path from Windhoek to Auschwitz.”
Central European History 42 (2009): 279–300.
Ginor, Isabella, and Gideon Remez. “A Cold War Casualty in Jerusalem,
1948: The Assassination of Witold Hulanicki.” Israel Journal of
Foreign Affairs 4, no. 3 (2010): 135–56.
Glass, Hildrun. Deutschland und die Verfolgung der Juden in
rumänischen Machtbereich 1940–1944. Munich: Oldenbourg, 2014.
Głowacki, Albin. Sowieci wobec Polaków na ziemiach wschodnich II
Rzeczypospolitej 1939–1941. Łódż, Poland: Wydawnictwo
Uniwersytetu Łódzkiego, 1998.
Gnatowski, Michał. “Niepokorni i przystosowani: Stosunki polskożydowskie w regionie łomżyńskim.” In Żydzi i stosunki polskożydowskie w regionie łomżyńskim w XIX i XX wieku, edited by
Michał Gnatowski, 149–60. Łomża, Poland: Łomżyńskie
Towarzystwo Naukowe im. Wagów, 2002.
Goeschel, Christian, and Nikolaus Wachsmann. Introduction to The Nazi
Concentration Camps, 1933–39: A Documentary History, 1–28.
Lincoln: Nebraska University Press, 2010.
Golan, Zev. Stern: The Man and His Gang. Tel Aviv: Yair Publishing,
2011.
Golczewski, Frank. Deutsche und Ukrainer, 1914–1939. Paderborn, Ger.:
Ferdinand Schöningh, 2010.
Goldinger, Walter, and Dieter Binder. Geschichte der Republik
Österreich 1918–1938. Oldenburg, Ger.: Verlag für Geschichte und
Politik, 1992.
Goldsmith, Benjamin E., and Dimitri Semenovich. “Political Instability
and Genocide: Comparing Causes in Asia and the Pacific and
Globally.” 2012.
Gondek, Leszek. Wywiad polski w Trzeciej Rzeszy 1933–1939. Gdynia,
Poland: Wojskowa Drukarnia, 1982.
Gordon, Peter. Continental Divide: Heidegger, Cassirer, Davos.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Gourevitch, Philip. We Wish to Inform You That Tomorrow We Will Be

Killed with Our Families. New York: Picador, 1998.
Goussef, Catherine. “Les déplacements forcés des populations aux
frontières russes occidentales (1914–1950).” In La violence de guerre
1914–1945, edited by S. Audoin-Rouzeau, A. Becker, Chr. Ingrao,
and H. Rousso, 177–90. Paris: Éditions Complexes, 2002.
Govrin, Yosef. “Ilya Ehrenburg and the Ribbentrop-Molotov Agreement.”
Israel Journal of Foreign Affairs 7, no. 2 (2013): 103–8.
———. The Jewish Factor in the Relations between Nazi Germany and
the Soviet Union 1933–1941. London: Vallentine Mitchell, 2009.
Grabowski, Jan. Judenjagd: Polowanie na Żydów 1942–1945. Studium
dziejów pewnego powiatu. Warsaw: Centrum Badań nad Zagłada
Żydów, 2011.
Graziosi, Andrea. “Collectivisation, révoltes paysannes et politiques
gouvernementales à travers les rapports du GPU d’Ukraine de
février-mars 1930,” Cahiers du Monde russe 34, no. 3 (1994) : 437–
72.
Gregory, Paul R. Terror by Quota: State Security from Lenin to Stalin.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2009.
Griffioen, Pim, and Ron Zeller. “Comparing the Persecution of the Jews
in the Netherlands, France, and Belgium: Similarities, Differences,
Causes.” In The Persecution of the Jews in the Netherlands 1940–
1945, edited by Peter Romijn, et al., 53–89. Amsterdam: Vossiuspers
UvA, 2012.
Gross, Jan Tomasz. Revolution from Abroad: The Soviet Conquest of
Poland’s Western Ukraine and Western Belorussia. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press, 1988.
———. Sąsiedzi: Historia zagłady żydowskiego miasteczka. Sejny,
Poland: Pogranicze, 2008.
———. “The Social Consequences of War: Preliminaries to the Study of
the Imposition of Communist Regimes in East Central Europe.” East
European Politics and Societies 3 (1989): 198–214.
Gross, Jan Tomasz, with Irena Grudzińska Gross. Golden Harvest:
Events at the Periphery of the Holocaust. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2012.
Gross, Irena Grudzińska, and Jan Tomasz Gross. War Through

Children’s Eyes: The Soviet Occupation of Poland and the
Deportations, 1939–1941. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press,
1981.
Gross, Raphael. Carl Schmitt and the Jews: The “Jewish Question,” the
Holocaust, and German Legal Theory. Translated by Joel Golb.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2007.
Grynberg, Anne. Les camps de la honte: Les internés juifs des camps
français (1939–1944). Paris: Éditions La Découverte, 1991.
Grynberg, Henryk. Monolog polsko-żydowski. Wołowiec, Poland:
Czarne, 2012.
Gudziak, Borys. Crisis and Reform. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1998.
Guettel, Jens-Uwe. “From the Frontier to German South-West Africa:
German Colonialism, Indians, and American Westward Expansion.”
Modern Intellectual History 7, no. 3 (2010): 523–52.
———. “The U.S. Frontier as Rationale for the Nazi East? Settler
Colonialism and Genocide in Nazi-Occupied Eastern Europe and the
American West.” Journal of Genocide Research 15, no. 4 (2013):
401–19.
Gumbrecht, Hans Ulrich. Nach 1945: Latenz als Ursprung der
Gegenwart. Translated by Frank Born. Berlin: Suhrkamp Verlag,
2012.
———. “Our Broad Present.” Read in manuscript, 2013.
Gurianov, A. le. “Obzor sovetskikh repressivnikh kampanii protiv
poliakov i pols’kikh grazhdan.” In Poliaki i russkie:
Vzaimoponimanie; vzaimoneponimanie, edited by A. V. Lipatov and
I. O. Shaitanov, 199–207. Moscow: Indrik, 2000.
Gustafson, Thane. Wheel of Fortune: The Battle for Oil and Power in
Russia. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012.
Habermas, Jürgen. Der philosophische Diskurs der Moderne. Frankfurt:
Suhrkamp Verlag, 1985.
Haestrup, Jørgen. “The Danish Jews and the German Occupation.” In
The Rescue of the Danish Jews: Moral Courage Under Stress, edited
by Leo Goldberger, 13–53. New York: New York University Press,
1987.

Hagen, William W. “Before the ‘Final Solution’: Toward a Comparative
Analysis of Political Antisemitism in Interwar Germany and Poland.”
Journal of Modern History 68, no. 2 (1996): 351–81.
———. German History in Modern Times: Four Lives of the Nation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Harvey, Elisabeth. Women and the Nazi East: Agents and Witnesses of
Germanization. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2003.
Haslam, Jonathan. The Soviet Union and the Struggle for Collective
Security in Europe, 1933–39. Houndsmills, UK: Macmillan, 1984.
Hauner, Milan. India in Axis Strategy: Germany, Japan, and Indian
Nationalists in the Second World War. Stuttgart, Ger.: Klett-Cotta,
1981.
Hazani, Moshe. “Red Carpet, White Lilies: Love of Death in the Poetry of
the Jewish Underground Leader Avraham Stern.” Psychoanalytic
Review 89, no. 1 (2002): 1–47.
Hecht, Dieter. “Demütigungsrituale—Alltagsszenen nach dem ‘Anschluss’
in Wien.” In “Anschluss” März–April 1938 in Österreich, edited by
Werner Welzig, 39–71. Vienna: ÖAW, 2010.
Heim, Susanne. “Einleitung.” In Die Verfolgung und Ermordung der
europäischen Juden durch das nationalsozialistische Deutschland
1933–1945. Vol. 2, Deutsches Reich 1938–August 1938, edited by
Susanne Heim, 13–63. Munich: Oldenbourg Verlag, 2009.
Heller, Daniel K. “The Rise of the Zionist Right: Polish Jews and the
Betar Youth Movement, 1922–1935.” PhD diss., Stanford University,
2012.
Heller, Joseph. The Stern Gang: Ideology, Politics, and Terror, 1940–
1949. London: Frank Cass, 1995.
———. “The Zionist Right and National Liberation: From Jabotinsky to
Avraham Stern.” Israel Affairs 1, no. 3 (1995): 85–110.
Helmuth, Brian et al. “Hidden Signals of Climate Change in Intertidal
Ecosystems: What (Not) to Expect When You Are Expecting.”
Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology, no. 400
(2011): 191–99.
Hempel, Adam. Pogrobowcy klęski: Rzecz o policji “granatowej” w
Generalnym Gubernatorstwiue 1939–1945. Warsaw: PWN, 1990.

Hentosh, Liliana. “Pro stavlennia mytropolyta Sheptyts’koho do
Nimets’koho oku-patsiynoho rezhymu v konteksti dokumenta z
kantseliariï Al’freda Rozenberga,” Ukraïna moderna, 2013, 298–317.
Herbeck, Ulrich. Das Feindbild vom “jüdischen Bolschewiken”: Zur
Geschichte des russischen Antisemitismus vor und während der
Russischen Revolution. Berlin: Metropol Verlag, 2009.
Herbert, Ulrich. Best: Biographische Studien über Radikalismus,
Weltanschauung und Vernunft, 1903–1989. Bonn, Ger.: J.H.W.
Dietz, 1996.
Herf, Jeffrey. The Jewish Enemy: Nazi Propaganda During World War
II and the Holocaust. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2006.
Heschel, Susannah. The Aryan Jesus: Christian Theologians and the
Bible in Nazi Germany. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
2008.
Hiio, Toomas, Meelis Maripuu, and Indrek Paavle. Introduction to
Estonia 1940–1945, vol. 1 of the report of the Estonian International
Commission for the Investigation of Crimes against Humanity.
Tallinn, Estonia: Tallinna Raamatutrükikoda, 2005.
Hilberg, Raul. The Destruction of the European Jews. 3 vols. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press, 2003.
Hildebrand, Klaus. Vom Reich zum Weltreich: Hitler, NSDAP und
koloniale Frage 1919–1945. Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1969.
Hillgruber, Andreas. “Die ideologisch-dogmatische Grundlage der
nationalsozialistischen Politik der Ausrottung der Juden in den
besetzten Gebieten der Sowjetunion und ihre Durchführung 1941–
1944.” German Studies Review 2, no. 3 (1979): 263–96.
Himka, John-Paul. “Ethnicity and Reporting of Mass Murder: Krakivski
visti, the NKVD Murders of 1941, and the Vinnytsia Exhumation.”
2009.
———. “Metropolitan Andrey Sheptytsky and the Holocaust.” Polin 26
(2013).
———. Religion and Nationality in Western Ukraine. Montreal: McGillQueen’s University Press, 1999.
Hintjens, Helen M. “Explaining the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda.” Journal

of African Studies 37, no. 2 (1999): 241–86.
Holler, Martin. Der nationalsozialistische Völkermord an den Roma in
der besetzten Sowjetunion (1941–1944). Heidelberg: Dokumentionsund Kulturzentrum Deutscher Sinti und Roma, 2009.
———. “The Nazi Persecution of Roma in Northwestern Russia: The
Operational Area of Army Group North, 1941–1944.” In The Nazi
Genocide of the Roma: Reassessment and Commemoration, edited
by Anton Weiss-Wendt, 153–80. New York: Berghahn Books, 2013.
Holquist, Peter. Making War, Forging Revolution: Russia’s Continuum
of Crisis, 1914–1921. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
2002.
Horkheimer, Max. Eclipse of Reason. New York: Oxford University Press,
1947.
Horkheimer, Max, and Theodor W. Adorno. Dialektik der Aufklärung:
Philosophische Fragmente. 1944. Reprint, Frankfurt: S. Fischer
Verlag, 1969.
Horta, Loro. “The Zambezi Valley: China’s First Agriculural Colony?”
Center for Strategic and International Studies, Online Public Policy
Forum, 20 May 2008.
Hryciuk, Grzegorz. Polacy we Lwowie 1939–1944. Warsaw: KiW, 2000.
———. “Victims 1939–1941: The Soviet Repressions in Eastern Poland.”
In Shared History—Divided Memory: Jews and Others in SovietOccupied Poland, edited by Elazar Barkan, Elisabeth A. Cole, and
Kai Struve, 173–200. Leipzig, Ger.: Leipzig University-Verlag, 2007.
Hrynevych, Vladyslav. Nepryborkane riznoholossia: Druha svitova viina
i suspil’no-politychni nastroï v Ukraïni, 1939–cherven’ 1941 rr.
Kyiv: Lira, 2012.
Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. “Quantifying
the Influence of Climate on Human Conflict,” Science, 1 August 2013.
Hull, Isabel V. Absolute Destruction: Military Culture and the Practices
of War in Imperial Germany. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
2005.
Husson, Édouard. Heydrich et la solution finale. Paris: Perrin, 2012.
Iliffe, John. “The Effects of the Maji Maji Rebellion of 1905–1906 on
German Occupation Policy in East Africa.” In Britain and Germany

in Africa, Imperial Rivalry and Colonial Rule, edited by Prosser
Gifford and Wm. Roger Lewis, with the assistance of Alison Smith,
558–75. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1967.
Il’iushyn, I. I. OUN-UPA i ukraïns’ke pytannia v roky druhoï svitovoï
viiny v svitli pol’s’kykh dokumentiv. Kyiv: NAN Ukraïny, 2000.
Ingrao, Christian. Believe and Destroy: Intellectuals in the SS War
Machine. Translated by Andrew Brown. Cambridge: Polity, 2013.
———. Les chasseurs noirs: La brigade Dirlewanger. Paris: Perrin,
2006.
———. “Violence de guerre, violence génocide: Les Einsatzgruppen.” In
La violence de guerre 1914–1945, edited by S. Audoin-Rouzeau, A.
Becker, Chr. Ingrao, and H. Rousso, 219–40. Paris: Éditions
Complexes, 2002.
Iordachi, Constantin. “Unerwünschte Bürge. Die ‘Judenfrage’ im
Rumänien und Serbien zwischen 1931 und 1939.” Transit:
Europäische Review, no. 43 (2012/2013): 106–17.
Iwanow, Mikołaj. Pierwszy naród ukarany: Stalinizm wobec polskiej
ludności kresowej 1921–1938. Warsaw: Omnipress, 1991.
Jabotinsky, Vladimir. The War and the Jew. New York: Dial Press, 1942.
Jäckel, Eberhard. Hitler in History. Hanover, N.H.: University Press of
New England, 1984.
———. “Der Novemberpogrom 1938 und die Deutschen.” In Die
Novemberpogrome 1938. Versuch einer Bilanz, edited by Andreas
Nachama and Claudia Steur, 66–73. Berlin: Stiftung Topographie
des Terrors, 2009.
Jangfeldt, Bengt. The Hero of Budapest: The Triumph and Tragedy of
Raoul Wallenberg. Translated by Harry D. Watson and Bengt
Jangfeldt. London: I. B. Tauris, 2014.
Jansen, Marc, and Nikolai Petrov. Stalin’s Loyal Executioner: People’s
Commissar Nikolai Ezhov, 1895–1940. Stanford, Calif.: Hoover
University Press, 2002.
Jardim, Tomaz. The Mauthausen Trial: American Military Justice in
Germany. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012.
Jelinek, Yeshayahu A. The Carpathian Diaspora: The Jews of
Subcarpathian Rus’ and Mukachevo, 1848–1948. New York: East

European Monographs, 2007.
Jobst, Kerstin. Zwischen Nationalismus und Internationalismus.
Hamburg: Dölling Verlag, 1996.
Jolluck, Katherine R. Exile and Identity: Polish Women in the Soviet
Union During World War II. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press, 2002.
Jonas, Hans. The Imperative of Responsibility: In Search of an Ethics
for the Technological Age. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1979.
Judt, Tony, and Timothy Snyder. Thinking the Twentieth Century. New
York: Penguin, 2012.
Jureit, Ulrike. Das Ordnen von Räumen: Territorium und Lebensraum
im 19. und 20. Jahrhundert. Hamburg: Hamburger Edition, 2012.
Kaasik, Peeter, and Toomas Hiio. “Political Repression from June to
August 1940.” In Estonia 1940–1945, edited by Toomas Hiio, Meelis
Maripuu, and Indrek Paavle, 310–18. Talinn, Estonia: Tallinna
Raamatutrükikoda, 2005.
Kachanovs’kyi, Ivan. “OUN(b) ta natsysts’ki masovi vbyvstva vlitku 1941
roku na istorychniy Volyni.” Ukraïna moderna 20 (2014): 215–44.
Kaczmarski, Marcin. “Domestic Sources of Russia’s China Policy.”
Problems of Post-Communism 59, no. 2 (2012): 3–17.
Kaplan, Eran. The Jewish Radical Right: Revisionist Zionism and Its
Ideological Legacy. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2005.
Kaprāns, Mārtiṇs, and Vita Zelče. “Vēsturiskie cilvēki un viṇu biogrāfijas.”
Latvijas Arhīvi 1 (2009): 166–93.
Karski, Jan. Wielkie mocarstwa wobec Polski 1919–1945. Translated by
Ełżbieta Morawiec. Warsaw: PIW, 1992.
Kassow, Samuel D. Who Will Write Our History? Rediscovering a
Hidden Archive from the Warsaw Ghetto. New York: Vintage, 2009.
Kay, Alex J. “Brothers: The SS Mass Murderer and the Concentration
Camp Inmate.” Transit Online, 2013.
———. Exploitation, Resettlement, Mass Murder: Political and Economic
Planning for German Occupation Policy in the Soviet Union, 1940–
1941. New York: Berghahn Books, 2006.
———. “Transition to Genocide, July 1941: Einsatzkommando 9 and the

Annihilation of Soviet Jewry.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 27,
no. 3 (2013): 411–42.
Kellogg, Michael. The Russian Roots of Nazism: White Émigrés and the
Making of National Socialism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2005.
Kenez, Peter. The Coming of the Holocaust: From Antisemitism to
Genocide. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Kermish, Joseph. “The Activities of Żegota.” In Rescue Attempts During
the Holocaust, edited by Yisrael Gutman and Efraim Zuroff, 367–98.
Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1977.
Kershaw, Ian. The End: The Defiance and Destruction of Nazi Germany.
New York: Penguin Press, 2011.
———. Fateful Choices: Ten Decisions That Changed the World, 1940–
1941. London: Penguin Books, 2007.
———. Hitler: A Biography. New York: W. W. Norton, 2008.
———. The “Hitler Myth”: Image and Reality in the Third Reich. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1987.
Kęsik, Jan. Zaufany Komendanta: Biografia Polityczna Jana Henryka
Józewskiego 1892–1981. Wrocław, Poland: Wydawnictwo
Uniwersytetu Wrocławskiego, 1995.
Khaustov, Vladimir. “Deiatel’nost’ organov gosudarstvennoi bezopasnosti
NKVD SSSR (1934–1941 gg.).” PhD diss., Akademiia Federal’noi
Sluzhby Bezopasnosti Rossiiskoi Federatsii, 1997.
Khlevniuk, Oleg V. The History of the Gulag: From Collectivization to
the Great Terror. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2004.
———. Stalin: New Biography of a Dictator. Translated by Nora A.
Favorov. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2015.
Kiernan, Ben. Blood and Soil: A World History of Genocide and
Extermination from Sparta to Darfur. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2007.
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, Martin Tanner, and Alexander F. Wagner.
“Ordinary Voting Behavior in the Extraordinary Election of Adolf
Hitler.” Journal of Economic History 68, no. 4 (2008): 951–96.
King, Marcus Dubois. “Factoring Environmental Security Issues into
National Security Threat Assessments: The Case of Global

Warming.” PhD diss., Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, 2008.
Kirsch, Jonathan. The Short Strange Life of Herschel Grynszpan: A Boy
Avenger, a Nazi Diplomat, and a Murder in Paris. New York:
Liveright, 2013.
Klafkowski, Alfons. Okupacja niemiecka w Polsce w świetle prawa
narodów. Poznań, Poland: Wydawnictwo Instytutu Zachodniego,
1946.
Klamper, Elizabeth. “Der ‘Anschlusspogrom.’ ” In Der Pogrom 1938:
Judenverfolgung in Österreich und Deutschland, edited by Kurt
Schmid and Robert Streibel, 25–41. Vienna: Picus Verlag, 1990.
Klare, Michael T. “Global Warming Battlefields: How Climate Change
Threatens Security,” Current History 107, no. 703 (2007): 355–61.
Klarsfeld, Serge. Le mémorial de la déportation des Juifs de France.
Paris: Beate et Serge Klarsfeld, 1978.
Klemperer, Victor. The Language of the Third Reich. Translated by
Martin Brady. London: Continuum, 2006.
Koenen, Gerd. Der Russland-Komplex: Die Deutschen und der Osten,
1900–1945. Munich: C. F. Beck, 2005.
Koialovich, Mikhail. Litovskaia tserkovnaia uniia. St. Petersburg, 1859.
Kołakowski, Leszek. Main Currents of Marxism: Its Rise, Growth, and
Dissolution. 3 vols. Translated by P. S. Falla. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1978.
Koonz, Claudia. The Nazi Conscience. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2003.
Kopka, Bogusław. Konzentrationslager Warschau: Historia i
następstwa. Warsaw: IPN, 2007.
Kopp, Kristin. “Constructing Racial Difference in Colonial Poland.” In
Germany’s Colonial Pasts, edited by Eric Ames, Marcia Klotz, and
Lora Wildenthal, 76–96. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press,
2005.
Kopstein, Jeffrey S., and Jason Wittenberg. “Intimate Violence: AntiJewish Pogroms in the Shadow of the Holocaust.” Manuscript, 2013.
Korb, Alexander. Im Schatten des Weltkriegs: Massengewalt der Ustaša
gegen Serben, Juden und Roma in Kroatien 1941–1945. Hamburg:
Hamburger Edition, 2013.

———. “Ustaša Mass Violence Against Gypsies in Croatia.” In The Nazi
Genocide of the Roma: Reassessment and Commemoration, edited
by Anton Weiss-Wendt, 73–95. New York: Berghahn Books, 2013.
Korboński, Stefan. “An Unknown Chapter in the Life of Menachem Begin
and Irgun Zvai Leumi.” East European Quarterly 13, no. 3 (1979):
373–79.
Kornat, Marek. Polen zwischen Hitler und Stalin: Studien zur polnischen
Aussenpolitik in der Zwischenkriegzeit. Berlin: be.bra verlag, 2012.
———. Polityka równowagi: Polska między Wschodem a Zachodem.
Cracow: Arcana, 2007.
———. Polityka zagraniczna Polski 1938–1939: Cztery decyzje Józefa
Becka. Gdańsk, Poland: Oskar, 2012.
Körner, T. W. The Pleasures of Counting. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
Korzec, Paweł. Juifs en Pologne: La question juive pendant l’entre-deuxguerres. Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale des Sciences
Politiques, 1980.
Koselleck, Reinhart. Futures Past: On the Semantics of Historical Time.
Translated by Keith Tribe. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1985.
Koslov, Elissa Mailänder. Gewalt im Dienstalltag. Die SS-Aufseherinnen
des Konzentrationsund Vernichtungslagers Majdanek. Hamburg:
Hamburger Edition, 2009.
Kostyrchenko, G. V. Gosudarstvennyi antisemitizm v SSSR ot nachala
do kul’minatsii 1938–1953. Moscow: Materik, 2005.
Kotkin, Stephen. Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995.
Kozaczuk, Władysław, and Jerzy Straszak. Enigma: How the Poles Broke
the Nazi Code. New York: Hippocrene Books, 2004.
Kruglov, Alexander. “Jewish Losses in Ukraine.” In The Shoah in
Ukraine: History, Testimony, Memorialization, edited by Ray
Brandon and Wendy Lower, 272–90. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 2008.
Krzywiec, Gregorz. Szowinizm po polsku: Przypadek Romana
Dmowskiego (1886–1905). Warsaw: Neriton, 2009.
Kudryashov, Sergei. “Russian Collaboration with the Nazis and the

Holocaust.” Paper presented at the International Institute for
Holocaust Research, Yad Vashem, 2001.
Kühne, Thomas. Belonging and Genocide: Hitler’s Community, 1918–
1945. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2010.
Kupczak, Janusz. Polacy na Ukrainie w latach 1921–1939. Wrocław:
Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Wrocławskiego, 1994.
Kuromiya, Hiroaki. Freedom and Terror in the Donbas: A UkrainianRussian Borderland, 1870s–1990s. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
———. Stalin. Harlow, UK: Pearson Longman, 2005.
Kuromiya, Hiroaki, and Andrzej Pepłoński. Między Warszawą a Tokio:
Polsko-japońska współpraca wywiadowcza 1904–1944. Toruń,
Poland: Wydawnictwo Adam Marszałek, 2009.
Kuwałek, Robert. Das Vernichtungslager Bełżec. Translated by Steffen
Hänschen. Berlin: Metropol, 2013.
Kwiet, Konrad. Reichskommissariat Niederlande: Versuch und Scheitern
nationalsozialistischer Neuordnung. Stuttgart, Ger.: Deutsche
Verlags-Anstalt, 1968.
Lafree, Gary. “Social Institutions and the Crime ‘Bust’ of the 1990s.”
Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 88, no. 4 (1998): 1325–
68.
Latif, M., and N. S. Keenlyside. “El Niño/Southern Oscillation Response
to Climate Change.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 106, no. 49 (2009): 20578–
83.
Leder, Andrzej. Prześniona rewolucja: Ćwiezenie z logiki historycznej.
Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Krytyki Politycznej, 2014.
Leonhard, Jörn. Die Büchse der Pandora: Geschichte des Ersten
Weltkriegs. Munich: Beck, 2014.
Levene, Mark. The Rise of the West and the Coming of Genocide.
London: I. B. Tauris, 2005.
Levin, Dov. “The Attitude of the Soviet Union to the Rescue of Jews.” In
Rescue Attempts During the Holocaust, edited by Yisrael Gutman
and Efraim Zuroff, 225–36. Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1977.
———. The Lesser of Two Evils: Eastern European Jewry Under Soviet

Rule, 1939–1941. Translated by Naftali Greenwood. Philadelphia:
Jewish Publication Society, 1995.
Levine, Hillel. In Search of Sugihara. New York: Free Press, 1996.
Libionka, Dariusz. “ZWZ-AK i Delegatura Rządu RP wobec eksterminacji
Żydów polskich.” In Polacy i Żydzi pod okupacją niemiecką 1939–
1945, Studia i materiały, edited by Andrzej Żbikowski, 15–208.
Warsaw: IPN, 2006.
Libionka, Dariusz, and Laurence Weinbaum. Bohaterowie,
hochsztaplerzy, opisywacze: Wokół Żydowskiego Żwiązku
Wojskowego. Warsaw: Centrum Badań nad Zagłada Żydów, 2011.
Liulevicius, Vejas Gabriel. The German Myth of the East, 1800 to the
Present. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
———. War Land on the Eastern Front: Culture, National Identity, and
German Occupation in World War I. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000.
Livezeanu, Irina. Cultural Politics in Greater Romania: Regionalism,
Nation-Building, and Ethnic Struggle, 1918–1930. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Cornell University Press, 1995.
Lohr, Eric. Nationalizing the Russian Empire: The Campaign against
Enemy Aliens during World War I. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2003.
———. “1915 and the War Pogrom Paradigm in the Russian Empire.” In
Anti-Jewish Violence: Rethinking the Pogrom in East European
History, edited by Jonathan Dekel-Chen, David Gaunt, Natan M.
Meir, and Israel Bartal, 41–51. Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2011,
———. Russian Citizenship from Empire to Soviet Union. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2012.
Longerich, Peter. Davon haben wir nichts gewusst! Die Deutschen und
die Judenverfolgung 1933–1945. Munich: Siedler, 2007.
———. Heinrich Himmler: Biographie. Berlin: Siedler, 2008.
———. Politik der Vernichtung: Eine Gesamtdarstellung der
nationalsozialistischen Judenverfolgung. Munich: Piper, 1998.
———. The Unwritten Order: Hitler’s Role in the Final Solution. Stroud,
UK: Tempus, 2001.

Loose, Ingo. “Reaktionen auf den Novemberpogrom in Polen 1938–
1939.” In Die Novemberpogrome 1938. Versuch einer Bilanz, edited
by Andreas Nachama and Claudia Steuer, 44–57. Berlin: Stiftung
Topographie des Terrors, 2009.
Łossowski, Piotr. Kraje bałtyckie w latach przełomu 1934–1944.
Warsaw: Instytut Historii PAN, 2005.
Lotspeich, Richard. “Economic Integration of China and Russia in the
Post-Soviet Era.” In The Future of China-Russia Relations, edited by
James Bellacqua, 83–145. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press,
2010.
Löw, Andrea. Juden im Getto Litzmannstadt: Lebensbedingungen,
Selbstwahrnehmung, Verhalten. Göttingen, Ger.: Wallstein Verlag,
2006.
Löw, Andrea, and Markus Roth. Juden in Krakau unter deutscher
Besatzung. Göttingen: Wallstein, 2011.
Lower, Wendy. “Axis Collaboration, Operation Barbarossa, and the
Holocaust in Ukraine.” In Nazi Policy on the Eastern Front: Total
War, Genocide, and Radicalization, edited by Alex J. Kay, Jeff
Rutherford, and David Stahel, 186–219. Rochester, N.Y.: University
of Rochester Press, 2012.
———. “German Colonialism and Genocide: A Comparative View from
Below in Africa 1904–1908 and Ukraine 1941–1944,” unpublished
paper, 2003.
———. Hitler’s Furies: German Women in the Nazi Killing Fields.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2013.
———. Nazi Empire-Building and the Holocaust in Ukraine. Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina Press, 2005.
———. “Pogroms, Mob Violence, and Genocide in Western Ukraine,
Summer 1941: Varied Histories, Explanations, and Comparisons.”
Journal of Genocide Research 13, no. 3 (2011): 217–46.
Lukacs, John. The Last European War. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 1976.
Lynch, Michael J., Ronald G. Burns, and Paul B. Stretesky, “Global
Warming and State-Corporate Crime: The Politicalization of Global
Warming Under the Bush Administration.” Crime, Law, and Social

Change 54 (2010): 213–39.
Machcewicz, Pawel. “Rund um Jedwabne—Neue Forschungsergebnisse
polnischer Historiker.” In Der Beginn der Vernichtung. Zum Mord
an den Juden in Jedwabne und Umgebung im Sommer 1941, edited
by Edmund Dmitrów, Paweł Machcewicz, and Tomasz Szarota, and
translated by Beate Kosmala, 19–94. Osnabrück, Ger.: Fibre, 2004.
MacLean, French. The Field Men: The SS Officers Who Led the
Einsatzkommandos. Atglen, Penn.: Schiffer, 1999.
MacQueen, Michael. “Nazi Policy Toward the Jews in the
Reichskommissariat Ostland, June–December 1941: From White
Terror to Holocaust in Lithuania.” In Bitter Legacy: Confronting the
Holocaust in the USSR, edited by Zvi Gitelman, 91–103.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1997.
Madajczyk, Czesław. “Legal Conceptions in the Third Reich and Its
Conquests.” Michael: On the History of Jews in the Diaspora 13
(1993): 131–59.
———. “Vom ‘Generalplan Ost’ zum ‘Generalsiedlungsplan.’ ” In Der
“Generalplan Ost”: Hauptlinien der nationalsozialistischen
Planungs- und Vernichtungspolitik, edited by Mechtild Rössler and
Sabine Schleiermacher, 12–19. Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1993.
Madajczyk, Czesław, and Stanisława Lewandowska. Hitlerowski terror
na wsi polskiej 1939–1945. Warsaw: PWN, 1965.
Maier, Charles S. The Unmasterable Past: History, Holocaust, and
German National Identity. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1997.
Mallmann, Klaus-Michael. “ ‘Rozwiązać przez jakikolwiek szybko
działający środek’:Policja Bezpieczeństwa w Łodzi a Shoah w Kraju
Warty.” In Zagłada Żydów na polskich terenach wcielonych do
Rzeszy, edited by Aleksandra Namysło, 85–115. Warsaw: IPN, 2008.
Mallmann, Klaus-Michael, Jochen Böhler, and Jürgen Matthäus.
Einsatzgruppen in Polen: Darstellung und Dokumentation.
Darmstadt, Ger.: WBG, 2008.
Mallmann, Klaus-Michael, and Martin Cüppers. Halbmond und
Hakenkreuz: Das Dritte Reich, die Araber und Palästina.
Darmstadt, Ger.: WBG, 2006.

Mamdani, Mahmood. When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism,
Nativism, and the Genocide in Rwanda. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2001.
Mańkowski, Zygmunt. “Ausserordentliche Befriedungsaktion.” In
Ausserordentliche Befriedungsaktion 1940 Akcja AB na ziemiach
polskich, edited by Zygmunt Mańkowski, 6–18. Warsaw: GKBZpNPIPN, 1992.
Mann, Michael. The Dark Side of Democracy: Explaining Ethnic
Cleansing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Mann, Michael E. “Do Global Warming and Climate Change Represent a
Serious Threat to Our Welfare and Environment?” Social Philosophy
and Policy 26, no. 2 (2009): 193–230.
Manoschek, Walter. “Serbien ist judenfrei”: Militärische
Besatzungspolitik und Judenvernichtung in Serbien 1941/1942.
Munich: R. Oldenbourg Verlag, 1993.
Maripuu, Meelis, and Argo Kuusik. “Political Arrests and Court Cases
from August 1940 to September 1941.” In Estonia 1940–1945, edited
by Toomas Hiio, Meelis Maripuu, and Indrek Paavle, 319–327.
Talinn, Estonia: Tallinna Raamatutrükikoda, 2005.
Maripuu, Meelis, and Peeter Kaasik. “Deportations of 14 June 1941.” In
Estonia 1940–1945, edited by Toomas Hiio, Meelis Maripuu, and
Indrek Paavle, 363–83. Tallinn: Tallinna Raamatutrükikoda, 2005.
Markiel, Tadeusz, and Alina Skibińska, Zagłada domu Trynczerów.
Warsaw: Stowarzyszenie Centrum Badań na Zagłada Żydów, 2011.
Marrus, Michael R., and Robert O. Paxton. Vichy France and the Jews.
Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1995.
Martin, Terry. Affirmative Action Empire. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell
University Press, 2001.
———. “The Origins of Soviet Ethnic Cleansing.” Journal of Modern
History 70, no. 4 (1998): 813–61.
Maslin, Mark. Global Warming: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2004.
Matthäus, Jürgen. “Controlled Escalation: Himmler’s Men in the
Summer of 1941 and the Holocaust in the Occupied Soviet
Territories.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 21, no. 2 (Fall 2007):

218–42.
Matz, Johan. “Cables in Cipher, the Raoul Wallenberg Case, and SwedishSoviet Diplomatic Communication 1944–1947.” Scandinavian
Journal of History 38, no. 3 (2013), 1–23.
———. “Sweden, the United States, and Raoul Wallenberg’s Mission to
Hungary in 1944.” Journal of Cold War Studies 14, no. 3 (2012): 97–
146.
Maubach, Franka. “Expansion weiblicher Hilfe: Zur
Erfahrungsgeschichte von Frauen im Kriegsdienst.” In
Volksgenossinnen. Frauen in der NS-Volksgemeinschaft, edited by
Sybille Steinbacher, 93–111. Göttingen, Ger.: Wallstein Verlag, 2007.
Maurer, Trude. “The Background for Kristallnacht: The Expulsion of
Polish Jews.” In November 1938: From “Reichskristallnacht” to
Genocide, edited by Walter H. Pehle, 44–72. Oxford: Berg, 1990.
Mazower, Mark. Governing the World: The History of an Idea. New
York: Penguin Press, 2012.
———. Hitler’s Empire: Nazi Rule in Occupied Europe. London: Allen
Lane, 2008.
———. Inside Hitler’s Greece: The Experience of Occupation, 1941–1944.
New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1995.
———. “An International Civilization? Empire, Internationalism, and the
Crisis of the Mid-Twentieth Century.” International Affairs 82, no. 3
(2006): 553–66.
———. Salonica: City of Ghosts. New York: Knopf, 2005.
———. “Violence and the State in the Twentieth Century.” American
Historical Review 107, no. 4 (2002): 1147–67.
McAuley, Jr., James K. “Decision in Bordeaux: Eduardo Propper de
Callejón, the Problem of the Jewish Refugees, and Actor-Network
Theory in Vichy France, 1940–1941.” BA thesis, Harvard College,
2012.
McDonough, Frank. Hitler and the Rise of the Nazi Party. London:
Pearson, 2003.
McGranahan, Graham, Deborah Balk, and Bridget Anderson. “The Rising
Tide: Assessing the Risks of Climate Change and Human Settlements
in Low Elevation Coastal Zones.” Environment and Urbanization 19,

no. 1 (2007): 17–37.
McNeill, William H. The Global Condition: Conquerors, Catastrophes,
and Community. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1992.
Mędrzecki, Włodzimierz. Województwo wołyńskie. Wrocław, Poland:
Ossolineum, 1988.
Mędykowski, Witold. W cieniu gigantów: pogromy 1941 r. w byłej
sowieckiej strefie okupacyjnej. Warsaw: ISP PAN, 2012.
Megargee, Geoffrey. War of Annihilation: Combat and Genocide on the
Eastern Front, 1941. Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 2007.
Melnyk, Oleksandr. “Stalinist Justice as a Site of Memory: Anti-Jewish
Violence in Kyiv’s Podil District in September 1941 Through the
Prism of Soviet Investigative Documents.” Jahrbücher für
Geschichte Osteuropas 61, no. 2 (2013): 223–48.
Melzer, Emanuel. No Way Out: The Politics of Polish Jewry. Cincinnati:
Hebrew Union College Press, 1997.
Michman, Dan. The Emergence of Jewish Ghettos During the Holocaust.
Translated by Lenn J. Schramm. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2011.
Mitchell, John F. B., Jason Lowe, Richard A. Wood, and Michael
Vellinga. “Extreme Events Due to Human-Induced Climate Change.”
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences 364 (2006): 2117–33.
Młynarczyk, Jacek Andrzej. Judenmord in Zentralpolen: Der Distrikt
Radom im Generalgouvernement 1939–1945. Darmstadt, Ger.:
WGB, 2007.
Monroe, Kristen Renwick. The Hand of Compassion: Portraits of Moral
Choice During the Holocaust, Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University
Press, 2004.
Moore, Bob. “Le contexte du sauvetage dans l’Europe de l’Ouest
occupée.” In La résistance aux génocides: De la pluralité des actes
de sauvetage, edited by Jacques Sémelin, Claire Andrieu, and Sarah
Gensburger, 277–90. Paris: Presses de la Fondation Nationale des
Sciences Politiques, 2008.
———. Victims and Survivors: The Nazi Persecution of the Jews in the
Netherlands, 1940–1945. London: Arnold, 1997.

Moorhouse, Roger. The Devils’ Alliance: Hitler’s Pact with Stalin, 1939–
1941. London: Bodley Head, 2014.
Morris, Benny. Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab
Conflict, 1881–1999. New York: Knopf, 1999.
Morris, James. “The Polish Terror: Spy Mania and Ethnic Cleansing in
the Great Terror.” Europe-Asia Studies 56, no. 5 (July 2004): 751–
66.
Mosse, George L. The Nationalization of the Masses: Political
Symbolism and Mass Movements in Germany from the Napoleonic
Wars Through the Third Reich. New York: Meridian, 1977.
Motyka, Grzegorz. Cień Kłyma Sawura: Polsko-ukraiński konflikt
pamięci. Gdańsk, Poland: Muzeum II Wojny Światowej, 2013.
———. Od rzezi wołyńskiej do akcji “Wisła”: Konflikt polsko-ukraiński
1943–1947. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Literackie, 2011.
Mount, Amy. “The Arctic Wake-up Call: Oil, Climate Change, and
Governance in the Place of Melting Ice.” Paper presented at Yale
University, 2013.
Moyo, Dambisa F. Winner Take All: China’s Race for Resources and
What It Means for the World. New York: Basic Books, 2012.
Müller, Rolf-Dieter. Der Feind steht im Osten: Hitlers geheime Pläne für
einen Krieg gegen die Sowjetunion im Jahr 1939. Berlin: Ch. Links
Verlag, 2011.
Musial, Bogdan. Sowjetische Partisanen 1941–1944: Mythos und
Wirklichkeit. Paderborn, Ger.: Ferdinand Schöningh, 2009.
Naumov, Leonid. Stalin i NKVD. Moscow: Iauza, 2007.
Neumann, Franz. Behemoth: The Structure and Practice of National
Socialism. Toronto: Oxford University Press, 1942.
Newbury, Catharine. “Background to Genocide: Rwanda.” Issue: A
Journal of Opinion 23, no. 2 (1995): 12–17.
Niemann, Alfred. Kaiser und Revolution. Berlin: August Scherl, 1922.
Nikol’skij, Vladimir. “Die ‘Kulakenoperation’ im ukrainischen Donbass.”
In Stalinismus in der sowjetischen Provinz 1937–1938, edited by
Rolf Binner, Bernd Bonwetsch, and Marc Junge, 613–40. Berlin:
Akademie Verlag, 2010.
Nikol’s’kyi, V. M. Represyvna diial’nist’ orhaniv derzhavnoï bezpeky

SRSR v Ukraïni. Donetsk, Ukraine: Vydavnytstvo Donets’koho
Natsional’noho Universytetu, 2003.
Nirenberg, David. Anti-Judaism: The Western Tradition. New York:
Norton, 2013.
Niv, David. M’arkhot ha-Irgun ha-tseva’i ha-le’umi. Vol. 2. Tel Aviv:
Mosad Klozner, 1966.
Nowak, Andrzej. Polska i trzy Rosje. Cracow: Arcana, 2001.
Nowak Jeziorański, Jan. “Gestapo i NKVD.” Karta, no. 37 (2003): 88–97.
Offer, Avner. The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1989.
Olaru-Cemîrtan, Viorica. “Wo die Züge Trauer trugen: Deportationen in
Bessarabien, 1940–1941.” Osteuropa 59, nos. 7–8 (2009): 219–26.
Oliner, Samuel P., and Pearl M. Oliner. The Altruistic Personality:
Rescuers of Jews in Nazi Europe. New York: The Free Press, 1988.
Olmstead, Alan L., and Paul W. Rhode. Creating Abundance: Biological
Innovation and American Agricultural Development. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Oreskes, Naomi, and Erik M. Conway. Merchants of Doubt: How a
Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco
Smoke to Global Warming. New York: Bloomsbury Press, 2010.
Ostałowska, Lidia. Farby wodne. Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Czarne, 2011.
Osterloh, Jörg. Nationalsozialistische Judenverfolgung im Reichsgau
Sudetenland 1938–1945. Munich: Oldenbourg Verlag, 2006.
Ozsváth, Zsuzsanna. In the Footsteps of Orpheus: The Life and Times of
Miklós Radnóti. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000.
Paavle, Indrek. “Fate of the Estonian Elite in 1940–1941.” In Estonia
1940–1945, edited by Toomas Hiio, Meelis Maripuu, and Indrek
Paavle, 391–409. Talinn, Estonia: Tallinna Raamatutrükikoda, 2005.
Panh, Rithy, with Christophe Bataille. L’élimination. Paris: Grasset, 2011.
Parker, Geoffrey. Global Crisis: War, Climate Change, and Catastrophe
in the Seventeenth Century. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 2013.
Pasztor, Maria. “Problem wojny prewencyjnej w raportach belgijskich
diplomatów z lat 1933–1934.” In Międzymorze: Polska i kraje

Europy środkowo-wschodniej XIX–XX wieku, edited by Andrzej
Ajnenkiel et al., 313–20. Warsaw: IH PAN, 1995.
Pauer-Studer, Herlinde. “Einleitung.” In Rechtfertigungen des Unrechts.
Das Rechtsdenken im Nationalsozialismum in Originaltexten,
edited by Herlinde Pauer-Studer and Julian Find, 15–135. Berlin:
Suhrkamp, 2014.
Pauley, Bruce F. “The Social and Economic Background of Austria’s
Lebensunfähigkeit.” In The Austrian Socialist Experiment, edited by
Anson Rabinbach, 21–37. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press, 1985.
Paulsson, Gunnar S. Secret City: The Hidden Jews of Warsaw 1940–
1945. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2002.
Pavlowitch, Stevan L. Hitler’s New Disorder: The Second World War in
Yugoslavia. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008.
Pedersen, Susan. “The Impact of League Oversight on British Policy in
Palestine.” In Britain, Palestine, and Empire: The Mandate Years,
edited by Rory Miller, 39–65. Farnham, UK: Ashgate, 2010.
Penter, Tanja. Kohle für Stalin und Hitler: Arbeiten und Leben im
Donbass 1929 bis 1953. Essen, Ger.: Klartext Verlag, 2010.
Pepłoński, Andrzej. Kontrwywiad II Rzeczypospolitej. Warsaw: Bellona,
2002.
———. Wywiad polskich sił zbrojnych na zachodzie 1939–1945. Warsaw:
MOREX, 1995.
Pergher, Roberta, and Mark Roseman. “The Holocaust—a Colonial
Genocide?” Dapim: Studies on the Holocaust 27, no. 1 (2013): 42–
73.
Petrov, Nikita, and K. V. Skorkin. Kto rukovodil NKVD, 1934–1941.
Moscow: Zven’ia, 1999.
Petrov, N. V., and A. B. Roginsksii. “ ‘Pol’skaia operatsiia’ NKVD 1937–
1938 gg.” In Repressii protiv poliakov i pol’skikh grazhdan, edited
by A. I. Gurianov, 22–43. Moscow: Zven’ia, 1997.
Petschar, Hans, ed. Anschluss: Eine Bildchronologie. Vienna: Christian
Brandstätter Verlag, 2008.
Pfeffer, W. T., J. T. Harper, and S. O’Neel. “Kinematic Constraints on
Glacier Contribution to 21st-Century Sea-Level Rise.” Science 321, 5
September 2008, 1340–43.

Pietrow, Nikita. Psy Stalina. Warsaw: Demart, 2012.
Piskorski, Jan M. Wygnańcy: przesiedlenia i uchodźcy w
dwudziestowiecznej Europie. Warsaw: Państwowy Instytut
Wydawniczy, 2009.
Pitman, A. J., A. Arneth, and L. Ganzeveld. “Regionalizing Global Climate
Change Models.” International Journal of Climatology 32 (2012):
321–37.
Plavnieks, Richards. “Nazi Collaborators on Trial During the Cold War:
The Cases against Viktors Arājs and the Latvian Auxiliary Security
Police.” PhD diss., University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2013.
Podolska, Anna. “Poland’s Antisemitic Rescuers: A Consideration of
Apparent Contradictions.” MA thesis, University College London,
2013.
Pohl, Dieter. Die Herrschaft der Wehrmacht: Deutsche Militärbesatzung
und einheimische Bevölkerung in der Sowjetunion 1941–1944.
Munich: R. Oldenbourg, 2008.
———. “Schauplatz Ukraine: Der Massenmord an den Juden im
Militärverwaltungsgebiet und im Reichskommissariat 1941–1943.”
In Ausbeutung, Vernichtung, Öffentlichkeit: Neue Studien zur
nationalsozialistischen Lagerpolitik, edited by Norbert Frei, Sybille
Steinbacher, and Bernd C. Wagner, 135–179. Munich: K. G. Saur,
2000.
———. “Ukrainische Hilfskräfte beim Mord an den Juden.” In Die Täter
der Shoah, edited by Gerhard Paul. Göttingen, Ger.: Wallstein
Verlag, 2002.
———. Verfolgung und Massenmord in der NS-Zeit 1933–1945.
Darmstadt, Ger.: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 2008.
Poliakov, Léon. Histoire de l’antisémitisme. Vol. 2, L’âge de la science.
Paris: Calmann-Lévy, 1981.
———. Sur les traces du crime. Paris: Éditions Grancher, 2012.
Polian, Pavel. “Hätte der Holocaust beinahe nicht stattgefunden?
Überlegungen zu einem Schriftwechsel im Wert von zwei Millionen
Menschenleben.” In Besatzung, Kollaboration, Holocaust: Neue
Studien zur Verfolgung und Ermordung der europäischen Juden,
edited by Johannes Hürter and Jürgen Zarusky. Munich:

Oldenbourg, 2010.
Pollack, Martin. Kontaminierte Landschaften. Vienna: Residenz Verlag,
2014.
———. Der Tote im Bunker: Bericht über meinen Vater. Vienna: Zsolnay,
2004.
———. Warum wurden die Stanislaws erschossen? Reportagen. Vienna:
Zsolnay, 2008.
Polonsky, Antony. The Jews in Poland and Russia. Vol. 2, 1881–1914.
London: Littman Library, 2010.
———. The Jews in Poland and Russia. Vol. 3, 1914–2008. London:
Littman Library, 2012.
———. Politics in Independent Poland 1921–1939: The Crisis of
Constitutional Government. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1972.
Poprzeczny, Joseph. Odilo Globocnik, Hitler’s Man in the East. Jefferson,
N.C.: McFarland, 2004.
Porter, Brian. When Nationalism Began to Hate: Imagining Modern
Politics in Nineteenth-Century Poland. New York: Oxford University
Press, 2000.
Porter-Szücs, Brian. Faith and Fatherland: Catholicism, Modernity, and
Poland. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Powell, James Laurence. The Inquisition of Climate Science. New York:
Columbia University Press, 2011.
Power, Samantha. “A Problem from Hell”: America and the Age of
Genocide. New York: Basic Books, 2002.
Prekerowa, Teresa. “Komórka ‘Felicji’: nieznane archiwum działacza
Rady Pomocy Żydom w Warszawie.” Rocznik warszawski 15 (1979):
519–56.
———. Konspiracyjna Rada Pomocy Żydom w Warszawie 1942–1945.
Warsaw: Państwowy Instytut Wydawniczy, 1982.
Preston, Paul. The Spanish Holocaust: Inquisition and Extermination in
Twentieth-Century Spain. New York: Norton, 2012.
Prusin, Alexander V. “A Community of Violence: The SiPo/SD and Its
Role in the Nazi Terror System in Generalbezirk Kiew.” Holocaust
and Genocide Studies 21, no. 1 (2007): 1–30.

———. The Lands Between: Conflict in the East European Borderlands,
1870–1992. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
———. Nationalizing a Borderland: War, Ethnicity, and Anti-Jewish
Violence in East Galicia, 1914–1920. Tuscaloosa: University of
Alabama Press, 2005.
Puławski, Adam. “The Polish Government-in-Exile in London, the
Delegatura, the Union of Armed Struggle-Home Army and the
Extermination of the Jews.” Holocaust Studies 18, nos. 2–3 (2012):
118–44.
———. W obliczu Zagłady: Rząd RP na Uchodźstwie, Delegatura Rządu
RP na Kraj, ZWZ-AK wobec deportacji Żydów do obozów zagłady
(1941–1942). Lublin, Poland: IPN, 2009.
Rabinbach, Anson. The Crisis of Austrian Socialism: From Red Vienna
to Civil War, 1927–34. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Rączy, Elżbieta. Pomoc Polaków dla ludnośći żydowskiej na
Rzeszowszczyźnie 1939–1945. Rzeszów, Poland: IPN, 2008.
Radchenko, Yuri. “Accomplices to Extermination: Municipal Government
and the Holocaust in Kharkiv.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 27,
no. 3 (2013): 443–63.
Raggam-Blesch, Michaela. “Das ‘Anschluss’-Pogrom in den Narrativen
der Opfer.” In “Anschluss” März–April 1938 in Österreich, edited by
Werner Welzig, 111–24. Vienna: ÖAW, 2010.
Ragsdale, Hugh. The Soviets, the Munich Crisis, and the Coming of
World War II. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Rahmsdorf, Stefan. “A Semi-Empirical Approach to Projecting Future
Sea-Level Rise.” Science 315 (19 January 2007), 368–70.
Redlich, Shimon. Together and Apart in Brzeżany: Poles, Jews, and
Ukrainians, 1919–1945. Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
2002.
Reeves, Eric. A Long Day’s Dying: Critical Moments in the Darfur
Genocide. Toronto: Key, 2007.
Reid, Anna. Leningrad: The Epic Siege of World War II, 1941–1944. New
York: Walker, 2011.
Rein, Leonid. “Local Collaboration in the Execution of the ‘Final Solution’
in Nazi-Occupied Belorussia.” Holocaust and Genocide Studies 20,

no. 3 (2006): 381–409.
Riabov, Oleg, and Tatiana Riabova. “The Decline of Gayropa? How Russia
Intends to Save the World.” Eurozine, 2014.
Rieger, Berndt. Creator of the Nazi Death Camps: The Life of Odilo
Globocnik. London: Vallentine Mitchell, 2007.
Ringelblum, Emanuel. Polish-Jewish Relations During the Second World
War. Translated by Dafna Allon, Danuta Dabrowska, and Dana
Keren. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press, 1992.
Robbe-Grillet, Alain. Pour un nouveau roman. Paris: Les Éditions de
Minuit, 1963.
Rodogno, Davide. Fascism’s European Empire: Italian Occupation
During the Second World War. Translated by Adrian Belton.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Rohde, Robert, et al. “A New Estimate of the Average Earth Surface Land
Temperature Spanning 1753 to 2011.” Paper presented at the Third
Santa Fe Conference on Global and Regional Climate Change, 2012.
Römer, Felix. Kameraden: Die Wehrmacht von innen. Munich: Piper,
2012.
———. Der Kommissarbefehl: Wehrmacht und NS-Verbrechen an der
Ostfront 1941/42. Paderborn, Ger.: Ferdinand Schöningh, 2008.
Romijn, Peter. “The ‘Lesser Evil’: The Case of the Dutch Local Authorities
and the Holocaust.” In The Persecution of the Jews in the
Netherlands 1940–1945, edited by Peter Romijn, 13–26.
Amsterdam: Vossiuspers UvA, 2012.
Roos, Hans. Polen und Europa: Studien zur polnischen Aussenpolitik.
Tübingen, Ger.: J. C. B. Mohr, 1957.
Rose, Laurel L. “Land and Genocide: Exploring the Connections with
Rwanda’s Prisoners and Prison Officials.” Journal of Genocide
Research 9, no. 1 (2007), 49–69.
Roseman, Mark. “The Lives of Others—Amid the Deaths of Others:
Biographical Approaches to Nazi Perpetrators.” Journal of Genocide
Research 15, no. 4 (2013): 443–61.
Rossino, Alexander B. “Anti-Jewish Violence in the Białystok District
During the Opening Weeks of Operation Barbarossa.” Paper
presented at the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, April

2001.
———. Hitler Strikes Poland: Blitzkrieg, Ideology, and Atrocity.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 2003.
Rotfeld, Adam Daniel. W cieniu: 12 rozmów z Marcinem
Wojciechowskim. Warsaw: Agora, 2012.
Roth, Randolph. American Homicide. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2009.
Rothkirchen, Livia. The Jews of Bohemia and Moravia: Facing the
Holocaust. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005.
Rothschild, Joseph. East Central Europe Between the Two World Wars.
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1974.
———. “Ethnic Peripheries Versus Ethnic Cores: Jewish Political
Strategies in Interwar Poland.” Political Science Quarterly 96, no. 4
(1981–82): 591–606.
———. Piłsudski’s Coup d’État. New York: Columbia University Press,
1966.
Rousso, Henry. La dernière catastrophe: L’histoire, le présent, le
contemporain. Paris: Gallimard, 2012.
———. Le régime de Vichy. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2012.
Rudnicki, Szymon. Równi, ale niezupełnie. Warsaw: Midrasz, 2008.
Rumpler, Helmut. Max Hussarek: Nationalitäten und
Nationalitätenpolitik in Österreich im Sommer des Jahres 1918.
Graz, Austria: Verlag Böhlau, 1965.
Rüβ, Hartmut. “Wer war verantwortlich für das Massaker von Babij Jar?”
Militärgeschichtliche Mitteilungen 57, no. 2 (1999): 483–508.
Rutherford, Philip T. Prelude to the Final Solution: The Nazi Program
for Deporting Ethnic Poles, 1939–1941. Lawrence: University Press
of Kansas, 2007.
Rzanna, Ewa. “Raul Hilberg, Zagłada Żydów Europejskich.” Read in
manuscript, 2014.
Sakamoto, Pamela Rotner. Japanese Diplomats and Jewish Refugees: A
World War II Dilemma. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 1998.
Sakowska, Ruth. Ludzie z dzielnicy zamkniętej: Żydzie w Warszawie w
okresie hitlerowskiej okupacji. Warsaw: PWN, 1975.

Salmonowicz, Stanisław. “The Tragic Night of Occupation: On
‘Collaboration from Below’ in the General Government.” Polin 26
(2013).
Salmonowicz, Stanisław, and Jerzy Serczyk. “Z problemów kolaboracji w
Polsce w latach 1939–1941.” Czasy Nowożytne 14 (2003), 43–65.
Saltier, Leon. “Dehumanizing the Dead: The Destruction of Thessaloniki’s
Jewish Cemetery in the Light of New Sources.” Yad Vashem Studies
42, no. 1 (2014), 11–46.
Sandler, Willeke Hannah. “ ‘Colonizers Are Born, Not Made’: Creating a
Colonial Identity in Nazi Germany, 1933–1945.” PhD diss., Duke
University, 2012.
Sarraute, Nathalie. L’ère du soupçon: Essais sur le roman. Paris:
Gallimard, 1956.
Sauerland, Karol. Polen und Juden: Jedwabne und die Folgen. Berlin:
Philo, 2004.
Saviello, Hillary. “This Bestial Policy: Allied Public Condemnations of the
Holocaust and the Establishment of the United Nations War Crimes
Commission.” PhD diss., London School of Economics, 2014.
Scheffran, Jürgen, and Antonella Battaglini. “Climate and Conflicts: The
Security Risks of Global Warming.” Regional Environmental
Change 11 (2011): 27–39.
Schelvis, Jules. Vernichtungslager Sobibór. Münster, Ger.: Unrast, 2003.
Schenke, Cornelia. Nationalstaat und nationale Frage: Polen und die
Ukrainer in Wolhynien 1921–1939. Hamburg: Dölling und Galitz
Verlag, 2004.
Schlögel, Karl. “Einleitung.” In Die Russische Revolution und das
Schicksal der Russischen Juden. Eine Debatte in Berlin, 1922–1923,
edited by Karl Schlögel and Karl-Konrad Tschäpe, 9–104. Berlin:
Matthes und Seitz, 2014.
———. Terror und Traum: Moskau 1937. Munich: Carl Hanser Verlag,
2008.
Schneider, Karl. Auswärts eingesetzt: Bremer Polizeibataillone und der
Holocaust, Essen, Ger.: Klartext Verlag, 2011.
Segal, Raz. “Beyond Holocaust Studies: Rethinking the Holocaust in
Hungary.” Journal of Genocide Research 16, no. 1 (2014): 1–23.

———. “Imported Violence: Carpatho-Ruthenians and Jews in CarpathoUkraine, October 1938–March 1939.” Polin 26 (2013).
Segev, Tom. One Palestine, Complete: Jews and Arabs Under the British
Mandate. Translated by Chaim Watzman. London: Abacus, 2001.
Seidel, Robert. Deutsche Besatzungspolitik in Polen: Der Distrikt Radom
1939–1945. Paderborn, Ger.: Ferdinand Schöningh, 2006.
Sémelin, Jacques. Persécutions et entraides dans la France occupée:
Comment 75% des Juifs en France ont échappé à la mort. Paris:
Seuil, 2013.
———. Purifier et détruire: Usages politiques des massacres et
génocides. Paris: Seuil, 2005.
Shapira, Anita. Israel: A History. Translated by Anthony Berris.
Waltham, Mass.: Brandeis University Press, 2012.
———. Land and Power: The Zionist Resort to Force, 1881–1948.
Translated by William Templer. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
Press, 1992.
Shavit, Yaacov. Jabotinsky and the Revisionist Movement 1925–1928.
London: Frank Cass, 1988.
Shepard, Todd. The Invention of Decolonization: The Algerian War and
the Remaking of France. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
2006.
Shilon, Avi. Menachem Begin: A Life. Translated by Danielle Zilberberg
and Yoram Sharett. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2012.
Shindler, Colin. The Triumph of Military Zionism: Nationalism and the
Origins of the Israeli Right. London: I. B. Taurus, 2006.
Shore, Marci. Caviar and Ashes: A Warsaw Generation’s Life and Death
in Marxism. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2006.
———. “Conversing with Ghosts: Jedwabne, Żydokomuna, and
Totalitarianism.” In The Holocaust in the East: Local Perpetrators
and Soviet Responses, edited by Michael David-Fox, Peter Holquist,
and Alexander M. Martin. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
2014.
———. “Język, pamięć i rewolucyjna awangarda: Kształtowanie historii
powstania w getcie warszawskim w latach 1944–1950.” Biuletyn
Żydowskiego Instytutu Historycznego 188, no. 3 (1998): 43–60.

———. The Taste of Ashes: The Afterlife of Totalitarianism in Eastern
Europe. New York: Crown, 2012.
Shore, Zachary. What Hitler Knew: The Battle for Information in Nazi
Foreign Policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Showalter, Dennis. “Comrades, Enemies, Victims: The Prussian/German
Army and the Ostvölker.” In The Germans and the East, edited by
Charles W. Ingrao and Franz A. J. Szabo, 209–25. West Lafayette,
Ind.: Purdue University Press, 2008.
Siemaszko, Władysław, and Ewa Siemaszko. Ludobójstwo dokonane
przez nacjonalistów ukraińskich na ludności polskiej Wołynia
1939–1945. Warsaw: von borowiecky, 2000.
Silver, Nate. The Signal and the Noise. New York: Penguin, 2012.
Simms, Brendan. Europe: The Struggle for Supremacy from 1453 to the
Present. New York: Basic Books, 2013.
Simons, Thomas W., Jr. Eastern Europe in the Postwar World. New
York: St. Martin’s, 1991.
Sirutavičius, Vladas, and Darius Staliūnas. “Was Lithuania a PogromFree Zone? (1881–1940).” In Anti-Jewish Violence: Rethinking the
Pogrom in East European History, edited by Jonathan Dekel-Chen,
David Gaunt, Natan M. Meir, and Israel Bartal, 146–58.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2011.
Skarga, Barbara. Penser après le Goulag. Edited by Joanna Nowicki.
Paris: Éditions du Relief, 2011.
Skibińska, Alina. “Perpetrators’ Self-Portrait: The Accused Village
Administration, Commune Heads, Fire Chiefs, Forest Rangers and
Gamekeepers.” East European Politics and Societies 25, no. 3
(2011): 457–85.
Skóra, Wojciech. Służba konsularna Drugiej Rzeczypospolitej:
Organizacja, kadry i działalność. Toruń, Poland: Adam Marszałek,
2006.
Slepyan, Kenneth. Stalin’s Guerrillas: Soviet Partisans in World War II.
Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 2006.
Smith, N., and A. Leiserowitz. “American Evangelicals and Climate
Change.” Global Environmental Change. Read in manuscript, 2013.
Smith, Woodruff D., “ ‘Weltpolitik’ und ‘Lebensraum.’ ” In Das

Kaiserreich Transnational, edited by Sebastian Conrad and Jürgen
Osterhammel, 29–48. Göttingen, Ger.: Vandenhoeck and Ruprecht,
2004.
Snyder, Timothy. Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin. New
York: Basic Books, 2010.
———. “The Causes of Ukrainian-Polish Ethnic Cleaning 1943.” Past and
Present, no. 179 (2003): 197–234.
———. “The Life and Death of West Volhynian Jews, 1921–1945.” In The
Shoah in Ukraine: History, Testimony, and Memorialization, edited
by Ray Brandon and Wendy Lower, 77–113. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press, 2008.
———. Nationalism, Marxism, and Modern Central Europe: A
Biography of Kazimierz Kelles-Krauz, 1872–1905. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1997.
———. “The Problem of Commemorative Causality.”
Modernism/Modernity 20, no. 1 (2013).
———. The Reconstruction of Nations: Poland, Ukraine, Lithuania,
Belarus, 1569–1999. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
2002.
———. The Red Prince: The Secret Lives of a Habsburg Archduke. New
York: Basic Books, 2008.
———. Sketches from a Secret War: A Polish Artist’s Mission to Liberate
Soviet Ukraine. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 2005.
———. Ukraïns’ka istoriia, rosiis’ka polityka, ievropeis’ke maibutnie.
Kyiv: Dukh i Litera, 2014.
Sohn-Rethel, Alfred. Industrie und Nationalsozialismus:
Aufzeichnungen aus dem “Mitteleuropäischen Wirtschaftstag.”
Edited by Carl Freytag. Berlin: Wagenbach, 1992.
Solomon, Steven. Water: The Epic Struggle for Wealth, Power, and
Civilization. New York: HarperCollins, 2010.
Solonari, Vladimir. “Ethnic Cleansing or ‘Crime Prevention”? Deportation
of Romanian Roma.” In The Nazi Genocide of the Roma:
Reassessment and Commemoration, edited by Anton Weiss-Wendt,
96–119. New York: Berghahn Books, 2013.
———. “Patterns of Violence: The Local Population and the Mass Murder

of Jews in Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina, July–August 1941.” In
The Holocaust in the East: Local Perpetrators and Soviet
Responses, edited by Michael David-Fox, Peter Holquist, and
Alexander Martin, chap. 5. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press, 2014. Read in manuscript.
Spector, Shmuel. The Holocaust of Volhynian Jews 1941–1944.
Translated by Jerzy Michałowicz. Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1996.
Spector, Stephen. Evangelicals and Israel: The Story of American
Christian Zionism. New York: Oxford University Press, 2009.
Spektor, Szmuel. “Żydzi wołyńscy w Polsce międzywojennej i w okresie II
wojny światowej (1920–1944).” In Europa nieprowincjonalna,
edited by Krzysztof Jasiewicz, 566–78. Warsaw: Instytut Studiów
Politycznych PAN, 1999.
Stanislawski, Michael. “Russian Jewry, the Russian State, and the
Dynamics of Jewish Emancipation.” In Paths of Emancipation:
Jews, States, and Citizenship, edited by Pierre Birnbaum and Ira
Katznelson, 262–83. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1995.
Stanton, Gregory H. “Could the Rwandan Genocide Have Been
Prevented?” Journal of Genocide Research 6, no. 2 (2004): 211–28.
Staub, Ervin. “The Origins and Evolution of Hate, with Notes on
Prevention.” In The Psychology of Hate, edited by Robert J.
Steirberg, 51–66. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological
Association, 2005.
Stein, Alexander. Adolf Hitler: Schüler der “Weisen von Zion.” Karlovy
Vary, Czech Republic: Graphia, 1936.
Steinbacher, Sybille. Auschwitz: Geschichte und Nachgeschichte.
Munich: Beck, 2004.
———. “Musterstadt Auschwitz”: Germanisierungspolitik und
Judenmord in Ostoberschlesien. Munich: K. G. Saur, 2000.
Steinberg, Jonathan. “The Third Reich Reflected: German Civil
Administration in the Occupied Soviet Union.” English Historical
Review 110, no. 437 (1995): 620–51.
Steiner, George. In Bluebeard’s Castle: Some Notes Toward the
Redefinition of Culture. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,

1971.
Steininger, Rolf. Der Staatsvertrag: Österreich im Schatten von
deutscher Frage und kaltem Krieg 1938–1955. Innsbruck, Austria:
Studien-Verlag, 2005.
———. “12 November 1918–12 March 1938: The Road to Anschluss.” In
Austria in the Twentieth Century, edited by Rolf Steininger, Günter
Bischof, and Michael Gehler, 85–114. New Brunswick, N.J.:
Transaction Publishers, 2002.
Steinweis, Alan E. Kristallnacht 1938. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 2009.
Stern, Nicholas. The Economics of Climate Change. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Sternberg, Troy. “Chinese Drought, Wheat, and the Egyptian Uprising:
How a Local Hazard Became Globalized.” In “The Arab Spring and
Climate Change,” edited by Caitlin E. Werrell and Francesco Fermia.
February 2013.
Sternhell, Zeev. Les anti-Lumières: Une tradition du XVIIe siècle à la
guerre froide. Paris: Gallimard, 2010.
Stola, Dariusz. Nadzieja i zagłada: Ignacy Schwarzbart—żydowski
przedstawiciel w Radzie Narodowej RP (1940–1945). Warsaw:
Oficyna Naukowa, 1995.
Stone, Daniel. The Polish-Lithuanian State, 1386–1795. Seattle:
University of Washington Press, 2001.
Stourzh, Gerald. Vom Reich zur Republik. Vienna: Editions Atelier, 1990.
Strassner, Peter. Europäische Freiwillige: Die Geschichte der 5. SS
Panzerdivision WIKING. Osnabrück, Ger.: Munin Verlag, 1968.
Straus, Scott. “How Many Perpetrators Were There in the Rwandan
Genocide? An Estimate.” Journal of Genocide Research 6, no. 1
(2004): 85–98.
Stroiński, Henryk. Represje stalinizmu wobec ludności polskiej na
Ukrainie w latach 1929–1939. Warsaw: Wspólnota Polska, 1998.
Studentowicz, Kazimierz et al., eds. Polska idea imperialna. Warsaw:
Polityka, 1938.
Subtelny, Orest. “German Diplomatic Reports on the Famine of 1933.” In
Famine-Genocide in Ukraine, 1932–1933, edited by Wsevolod

Isajiw, 13–26. Toronto: Ukrainian Canadian Research and
Documentation Centre, 2003.
Sullivan, Gordon R., et al. “National Security and the Threat of Climate
Change.” Arlington, Va.: CNA Corporation, 2007.
Surkis, Judith. Sexing the Citizen: Morality and Masculinity in France,
1870–1920. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2006.
Szaynok, Bożena. Zhistorią i Moskwą w tle: Polska a Izrael 1944–1968.
Warsaw: IPN, 2007.
Tebaldi, Claudia, Benjamin H. Strauss, and Chris E. Zervas. “Modelling
Sea Level Rise Impacts on Storm Surges Along US Coasts.”
Environmental Research Letters 7, 014032 (2012): 1–11.
Tec, Nechama. Defiance: The Bielski Partisans. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1993.
———. In the Lion’s Den: The Life of Oswald Rufeisen. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1990.
———. When Light Pierced the Darkness: Christian Rescues of Jews in
Nazi-Occupied Poland. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Ther, Philipp. Ciemna strona państw narodowych: Czystki etniczne w
nowoczesnej Europie. Poznań: Wydawnictwo Poznańkie, 2011.
Thies, Jochen. Architekt der Weltherrschaft: Die “Endziele” Hitlers.
Düsseldorf, Ger.: Droste Verlag, 1976.
Thomä, Dieter. “Sein und Zeit im Rückblick: Heideggers Selbstkritik.” In
Martin Heidegger: Sein und Zeit, edited by Thomas Rentsch, 282–
98. Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2001.
Thomson, Allison M. et al. “Climate Change Impacts for the
Conterminous USA: An Integrated Assessment. Part 3: Dryland
Production of Grain and Forage Crops.” Climatic Change, no. 69
(2005): 43–65.
———. “Climate Change Impacts for the Conterminous USA: An
Integrated Assessment. Part 5: Irrigated Agriculture and National
Grain Crop Production.” Climatic Change, no. 69 (2005): 89–105.
Tollefson, Jeff. “The Sceptic Meets His Match.” Nature 475 (2011): 440–
41.
Tomaszewski, Jerzy. “The Civil Rights of Jews in Poland, 1918–1939.”
Polin 8 (1995): 124.

———. Preludium Zagłady: Wygnanie Żydów polskich z Niemiec w 1938
r. Łódź Poland: PWN SA, 1998.
Tomkiewicz, Monika. Zbrodnia w Ponarach 1941–1944. Warsaw: IPN,
2008.
Tooze, Adam. The Wages of Destruction: The Making and Breaking of
the Nazi Economy. New York: Viking, 2007.
Tort, Patrick. L’effet Darwin: Sélection naturelle et naissance de la
civilisation. Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 2008.
Trentmann, Frank. “Coping with Shortage: The Problem of Food Security
and Global Visions of Coordination, c. 1890s–1950.” In Food and
Conflict in the Age of the Two World Wars, edited by Frank
Trentmann and Flemming Just, 13–48. Houndmills, UK: Palgrave
Macmillan, 2006.
Triepel, Heinrich. Die Hegemonie: Ein Buch von Führenden Staaten.
Stuttgart, Ger.: W. Kohlhammer, 1938.
Trunk, Isaiah. Judenrat: The Jewish Councils in Eastern Europe Under
Nazi Occupation. New York: Macmillan, 1972.
Tyaglyy, Mikhail. “Nazi Occupation Policies and the Mass Murder of the
Roma in Ukraine.” In The Nazi Genocide of the Roma:
Reassessment and Commemoration, edited by Anton Weiss-Wendt,
120–52. New York: Berghahn Books, 2013.
Ungváry, Krisztián. The Siege of Budapest: One Hundred Days in World
War II. Translated by Ladislaus Löb. New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University Press, 2005.
Urynowicz, Marcin. “Stosunki polsko-żydowskie w Warsawie w okresie
okupacji hitlerowskiej.” In Polacy i Żydzi pod okupacją niemiecką
1939–1945: Studia i materiały, edited by Andrzej Żbikowski, 537–
690. Warsaw: IPN, 2006.
Valentino, Benjamin. Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the
Twentieth Century. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2004.
Van der Boom, Bart. “Ordinary Dutchmen and the Holocaust: A
Summary of Findings.” In The Persecution of the Jews in the
Netherlands 1940–1945, edited by Peter Romijn et al., 29–52.
Amsterdam: Vossiuspers UvA, 2012.
Van de Vliert, Evert, Huadong Yang, Yongli Wang, and Xiao-peng Ren.

“Climato-Economic Imprints on Chinese Collectivism.” Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology 44, no. 4 (2012): 589–605.
Vasari, Emilio. Dr. Otto Habsburg oder die Leidenschaft für Politik.
Vienna: Verlag Herold, 1972.
Veidlinger, Jeffrey. In the Shadow of the Shtetl: Small-Town Jewish Life
in Soviet Ukraine. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2013.
Verbrechen der Wehrmacht: Dimensionen des Vernichlungskrieges
1941–1944. Hamburg: Institut für Sozialforschung, 2002.
Vīksne, Rudīte. “Members of the Arājs Commando in Soviet Court Files:
Social Position, Education, Reasons for Volunteering, Penalty.” In
The Hidden and Forbidden History of Latvia under Soviet and Nazi
Occupations 1940–1991, edited by Valters Nollendorfs and Erwin
Oberländer, 188–208. Riga: Institute of the History of Latvia
Publishers, 2007.
Vilhjálmsson, Vilhjálmur Örn, and Bent Blüdnikow. “Rescue, Expulsion,
and Collaboration: Denmark’s Difficulties with Its World War II
Past.” Jewish Political Studies Review 18, nos. 3–4 (2006).
Vincent, C. Paul. The Politics of Hunger: The Allied Blockade of
Germany, 1915–1919. Athens: Ohio University Press, 1985.
Viola, Lynne. “Selbstkolonisierung der Sowjetunion.” Transit, no. 38
(2011): 34–56.
———. The Unknown Gulag: The Lost World of Stalin’s Special
Settlements. New York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Walicki, Andrzej. Philosophy and Romantic Nationalism: The Case of
Poland. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1994.
Wandycz, Piotr S. The Lands of Partitioned Poland, 1772–1918. Seattle:
University of Washington Press, 1975.
———. “Poland Between East and West.” In The Origins of the Second
World War Reconsidered, edited by Gordon Martel, 187–210. New
York: Routledge, 1999.
———. Soviet-Polish Relations, 1917–1921. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1969.
———. Z Piłsudskim i Sikorskim: August Zaleski, Minister Spraw
Zagranicznych w latach 1926–1932 i 1939–1941. Warsaw:
Wydawnictwo Sejmowe, 1999.

Ward, James Mace. Priest, Politician, Collaborator: Jozef Tiso and the
Making of Fascist Slovakia. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press,
2013.
Wasser, Bruno. Himmlers Raumplanung im Osten. Basel, Switz.:
Birkhäuser Verlag, 1993.
Wasserstein, Bernard. The Ambiguity of Virtue: Gertrude van Tijn and
the Fate of the Dutch Jews. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 2014.
———. On the Eve: The Jews of Europe Before the Second World War.
New York: Simon and Schuster, 2012.
Weart, Spencer. “Global Warming: How Skepticism Became Denial.”
Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 67, no. 1 (2011): 41–50.
Webb, Walter Prescott. The Great Frontier. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1952.
Weber, Timothy P. On the Road to Armageddon: How Evangelicals
Became Israel’s Best Friends. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Academic,
2004.
Weil, Patrick. How to Be French: Nationality in the Making Since 1789.
Translated by Catherine Porter. Durham, N.C.: Duke University
Press, 2008.
Weinbaum, Laurence. A Marriage of Convenience: The New Zionist
Organization and the Polish Government 1936–1939. Boulder,
Colo.: East European Monographs, 1993.
Weinberg, Gerhard L. The Foreign Policy of Hitler’s Germany. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
———. A World at Arms: A Global History of World War II. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1994.
Weiner, Amir. Making Sense of War: The Second World War and the
Fate of the Bolshevik Revolution. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press, 2001.
Weiss, Yfaat. Deutsche und polnische Juden vor dem Holocaust:
Jüdische Identität zwischen Staatsbürgerschaft und Ethnizität
1933–1940. Translated by Matthias Schmidt. Munich: Oldenbourg,
2000.
Weiss-Wendt, Anton. Murder Without Hatred: Estonians and the

Holocaust. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 2009.
Weitbrecht, Dorothee. Der Exekutionsauftrag der Einsatzgruppen in
Polen. Filderstadt, Ger.: Markstein, 2001.
Werth, Nicolas. La terreur et le désarroi: Staline et son système. Paris:
Perrin, 2007.
Westerling, Anthony L., et al. “Continued Warming Could Transform
Greater Yellowstone Fire Regimes by Mid-21st Century.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 108, no. 32 (2011): 13165–70.
Wette, Wolfram. Feldwebel Anton Schmid: Ein Held der Humanität.
Frankfurt: S. Fischer Verlag, 2013.
———. Karl Jäger: Mörder der litauischen Juden. Frankfurt: S. Fischer
Verlag, 2011.
White, Lynn. “The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis.” Science 155
(1967): 1203–7.
Wieczorkiewicz, Paweł Piotr. Łańcuch śmierci: Czystka w Armii
Czerwonej 1937–1939. Warsaw: Rytm, 2001.
Wierzbicki, Marek. “Soviet Economic Policy in Annexed Eastern Poland.”
In Stalin and Europe: Imitation and Domination, 1928–1953, edited
by Timothy Snyder and Ray Brandon, 114–37. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2014.
Wieviorka, Annette, and Laffitte, Michel. A l’intérieur du camp de
Drancy. Paris: Perrin, 2012.
Wildenthal, Lora. German Women for Empire, 1884–1945. Durham,
N.C.: Duke University Press, 2001.
Wildt, Michael. An Uncompromising Generation: The Nazi Leadership
of the Reich Security Main Office. Translated by Tom Lampert.
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2009.
Wnuk, Rafał. “Za pierwszego Sowieta”: Polska konspiracja na Kresach
Wschodnich II Rzeczypospolitej. Warsaw: IPN, 2007.
Wojciechowski, Marian. Stosunki polsko-niemieckie 1933–1938. Poznań:
Instytut Zachodni, 1980.
Wróbel, Piotr. “The Seeds of Violence: The Brutalization of an East
European Region, 1917–1921.” Journal of Modern History 1, no. 1
(2003): 125–43.

Wróblewski, Robert. Dywizja Wiking w Polsce w świetle materiałow
archiwalnych. Lublin, Poland: Kagero, 2010.
Wynot, Edward D., Jr. “ ‘A Necessary Cruelty’: The Emergence of Official
Antisemitism in Poland, 1936–1939.” American Historical Review
76, no. 4 (1971): 1035–58.
Yang, Dali L. Calamity and Reform in China: State, Rural Society, and
Institutional Change Since the Great Leap Famine. Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1996.
Yisraeli, David. “Germany and Zionism.” In Germany and the Middle
East, 1835–1939, edited by Jehuda L. Wallach, 142–64. Tel Aviv: Tel
Aviv University, 1975.
———. ha-Raikh ha-Germani ve-Erets Yiśra’el: be‘ayot Erets Yiśra’el bamediniyut ha-Germanit ba-shanim 1889–1945. Ramat-Gan, Israel:
Bar Ilan University, 1974.
Zagłada polskich elit: Akcja AB—Katyń. Warsaw: Instytut Pamięci
Narodowej, 2006.
Zaremba, Marcin. Wielka Trwoga: Polska 1944–1947. Cracow: Znak,
2012.
Zarka, Yves-Charles. Un détail Nazi dans la pensée de Carl Schmitt: La
justification des lois de Nuremberg du 15 septembre 1935. Paris:
Presses Universitaires de France, 2005.
Żbikowski, Andrzej. Karski. Warsaw: Świat Książki, 2011.
———. “ ‘Night Guard’: Holocaust Mechanisms in the Polish Rural Areas,
1942–1945.” East European Politics and Societies 25, no. 3 (2011):
512–29.
Zehnpfennig, Barbara. Hitlers Mein Kampf. Eine Interpretation.
Munich: W. Fink, 2000.
Zertal, Idith. Israel’s Holocaust and the Politics of Nationhood.
Translated by Chaya Galai. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2011.
Zhang Xuebin et al. “Detection of Human Influence on TwentiethCentury Precipitation Trends.” Nature 448 (2007): 461–66.
Ziegler, Jean. Betting on Famine: Why the World Still Goes Hungry.
Translated by Christopher Caines. New York: New Press, 2013.
Zimmerer, Jürgen. Von Windhuk nach Auschwitz: Beiträge zum

Verhältnis von Kolonialismus und Holocaust. Münster, Ger.: LIT
Verlag, 2011.
Zolotar’ov, Vadim. “Nachal’nyts’kyi sklad NKVS USRR u seredyni 30-h
rr.” Z arkhiviv VUChK-HPU-NKVD-KGB, no. 2 (2001): 326–31.
Żyndul, Jolanta. Zajścia antyżydowskie w Polsce w latach 1935–1937.
Warsaw: Fundacja Kelles-Krauza, 1994.

Fiction
Bernhard, Thomas. Heldenplatz. 1988. Reprint, Frankfurt: Surhkamp,
1995.
Conrad, Joseph. Heart of Darkness and Other Stories. 1899. Reprint,
London: Wordsworth, 1998.
Grossman, Vasily. Life and Fate. 1959. Reprint, New York: Harper, 1985.
Orwell, George. 1984. 1949. Reprint, London: Penguin, 2008.
Zweig, Stefan. Schachnovelle. 1943. Reprint, Frankfurt: Fischer, 2004.

